THE COLLECTED WORKS OF 



ABRAHAM LINCOLN 



THE COLLECTED WORKS OF 

ABRAHAM LINCOLN 

THE ABRAHAM LINCOLN ASSOCIATION 
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS 

IV 

ROY P. BASLER, EDITOR 

MARION DOLORES PRATT AND LLOYD A. DUNLAP 
ASSISTANT EDITORS 



RUTGERS UNIVERSITY PRE^S 

NEW BRUNSWICK, NE^ : EKSEY 

1953 



COPYRIGHT, 1953? BY 
THE ABRAHAM LINCOLN ASSOCIATION 



UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
BOOK MANOT^CTTJRING COMPANY, INC , NEW YORK 



SOURCES 
AND LOCATION SYMBOLS 



DESCRIPTION OF SOURCES 

THE folio-wing symbols provide a description of sources as cited at 
the beginning of the first footnote to each item. In addition to the 
customary symbols for describing manuscripts, the editors have 
employed symbols or single words to identify other sources which 
have been cited repeatedly in the first footnote. 

AD Autograph Document 

ADS Autograph Document Signed 

ADf Autograph Draft 

ADf S Autograph Draft Signed 

AE Autograph Endorsement 

AES Autograph Endorsement Signed 

AL Autograph Letter 

ALS Autograph Letter Signed 

ALS copy Autograph Letter Signed, copied by Lincoln and pre- 
served in his papers 

Copy Copy not by Lincoln 

D Document 

DS Document Signed 

Df Draft 

DfS Draft Signed 

ES Endorsement Signed 

F Facsimile following any of the preceding symbols 

LS Letter Signed 

P Photostat following any of the preceding symbols 

Angle Neuj Letters and Papers of Lincoln. Compiled by Paul 

M. Angle. Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin 

Company, 1930. 
Heradon Herndon's Lincoln: The True Story of a Great Life. By 

William H. Herndon and Jesse W. Weik. 3 volumes. 

Chicago, New York, and San Francisco: Belf ord, Clarke 

& Company, [1889]. 
Hertz Abraham Lincoln: A New Portrait. By Emanuel Hertz. 

2 volumes. New York: Horace Liveright, Inc., 1931. 
Lapsley The Writings of Abraham Lincoln. Edited by Arthur 

Brooks Lapsley. 8 volumes. New York: P. F. Collier and 

Son, 19 o 5 . 445072 



OR 



Tarbell 

Tracy 

Wilson 



CCamStJ 
CLCM 

CSmH 

CoHi 

CoU 

Ct 

CtHi 

CtLEB 

CtSoP 

CtWat 

CtY 

DLC 

DLC-HW 

DLC-RTL 

DLM 
DNA 



DNM 



SOURCES 

Complete Works of Abraham Lincoln. Edited by John 
G. Nicolay and John Hay. 12 volumes. New York: 
Francis D.Tandy Company, 1905- . 

The War of the Rebellion: A Compilation o/ the Official 
Records of the Union and Confederate Armies. 4 series; 
7 o "volumes"; 128 books. Washington- Government 
Printing Office, 1880-1901. Roman numerals are used 
for Series, Volume, and Part (if any); pages are in 

arabic. 

The Life of Abraham Lincoln. . . . By Ida M. Tarbell. 

2 volumes. New York: The Doubleday & McClure 

Company, 1900. 

Uncollected Letters of Abraham Lincoln. Edited by 

Gilbert A. Tracy. Boston and New York: Houghton 

Mifflin Company, 1917. 

Uncollected Works of Abraham Lincoln. Edited by Ru- 

fus Rockwell Wilson. 2 volumes. Elmira, New York: 

Primavera Press, 1947-1948. 

LOCATION SYMBOLS 

St. John's Seminary Library, Camarillo, Calif. 

Los Angeles County Museum Library, Los Angeles, 

Calif. 

Henry E. Huntington Library, San Marino, Calif. 

State Historical Society of Colorado, Denver, Colo. 

University of Colorado Library, Boulder, Colo. 

Connecticut State Library, Hartford, Conn. 

Connecticut Historical Society, Hartford, Conn. 

Litchfield Historical Society, Litchfield, Conn. 

Pequot Library, Southport, Conn. 

Watertown Library Association, Watertown, Conn. 

Yale University Library, New Haven, Conn. 

Library of Congress, Washington, D. C. 

Herndon-Weik Collection, Library of Congress 

The Robert Todd Lincoln Collection of the Papers of 

Abraham Lincoln, Library of Congrers 

Lincoln Museum, Ford's Theatre, National Park Serv- 

ice, Washington, D. C. 

National Archives, Washington, D. C. All additional 

abbreviations and numbers given with this symbol are 

those employed by the National Archives at the time 

the manuscript was located. 

National Museum Library, Washington, D. C. 



SOURCES 

DeHi Historical Society of Delaware Library, Wilmington, 

Del. 

DeWI Wilmington Institute Free Library, Wilmington, Del. 

I-Ar Archives Division, Illinois State Library, Springfield, 

111. 

IBloHi McLean County Historical Society, Bloomington, 111. 

ICHi Chicago Historical Society, Chicago, 111. 

ICU University of Chicago Library, Chicago, 111. 

IDecJ James Millikin University Library, Decatur, 111. 

IFre Freeport Public Library, Freeport, 111. 

IHi Illinois State Historical Library, Springfield, 111. 

LIT Illinois College Library, Jacksonville, 111. 

ISLA The Abraham Lincoln Association, Springfield, 111. 

IU University of Illinois Library, Urbana, 111. 

laCrM Iowa Masonic Library, Cedar Rapids, Iowa 

laDaM Davenport Public Museum, Davenport, Iowa 

laHA Iowa State Department of History and Archives, Des 

Moines, Iowa 

In Indiana State Library, Indianapolis, Ind. 

InFtwL Lincoln National Life Foundation, Fort Wayne, Ind. 

InHi Indiana Historical Society, Indianapolis, Ind. 

InLTHi Tippecanoe County Historical Association, Lafayette, 

Ind. 

InU Indiana University Library, Bloomington, Ind. 

KyBC Berea College Library, Berea, Ky. 

KyU University of Kentucky Library, Lexington, Ky. 

LU Louisiana State University Library, Baton Rouge, La. 

MB Boston Public Library, Boston, Mass. 

MCon Free Public Library, Concord, Mass. 

MFai Millicent Library, Fairhaven, Mass. 

MH Harvard University Library, Cambridge, Mass. 

MHi Massachusetts Historical Society, Boston, Mass. 

MS Springfield Library Association, Springfield, Mass. 

MSHi Connecticut Valley Historical Society, Springfield, 

Mass. 

MdAA Hall of Records, State of Maryland, Annapolis, Md. 

MdHi Maryland Historical Society, Baltimore, Md. 

MeHi Maine Historical Society, Portland, Me. 

MiD Detroit Public Library, Detroit, Mich. 

MiK-M Kalamazoo Public Library Museum, Kalamazoo, Mich. 

MiU-C William L. Clements Library, University of Michigan, 

Ann Arbor, Mich. 

[vii] 



SOURCES 

MiU-Hi Michigan Historical Collection, University of Mich- 
igan, Ann Arbor, Mich. 

MnHi Minnesota Historical Society, St. Paul, Minn. 

MnSM Macalester College Library, St. Paul, Minn. 

MoHi State Historical Society of Missouri, Columbia, Mo. 

MoSHi Missouri Historical Society, St. Louis, Mo. 

N New York State Library, Albany, N. Y. 

NAuE Fred L. Emerson Foundation, Auburn, N. Y. 

NBLiHi Long Island Historical Society, Brooklyn, N. Y. 

NBuG Grosvenor Library, Buffalo, New York 

NBuHi Buffalo Historical Society, Buffalo, N. Y. 

NDry Southworth Library, Dryden, N. Y. 

NHi New- York Historical Society, New York City 

NIC Cornell University Library, Ithaca, N. Y. 

NN New York Public Library, New York City 

NNC Columbia University Library, New York City 

NNP Pierpont Morgan Library, New York City 

NRU University of Rochester Library, Rochester, N Y 

NSh John Jermain Memorial Library, Sag Harbor, N. Y. 

NSk Skaneateles Library Association, Skaneateles, N. Y. 

NWM U. S. Military Academy Library, West Point, N. Y. 

NbO Omaha Public Library, Omaha, Nebr. 

NcGu Guilford College Library, Guilford, N. C. 

NhExP Phillips Exeter Academy, Exeter, N. H. 

NjP Princeton University Library, Princeton, N. J. 

OCHP Historical and Philosophical Society of Ohio, Cincin- 
nati, Ohio 

OC1CS Case Institute of Technology, Cleveland, Ohio 

OClWHi Western Reserve Historical Society, Cleveland, Ohio 

OFH Hayes Memorial Library, Fremont, Ohio 

OMC Marietta College Library, Marietta, Ohio 

ORB Oliver R. Barrett Collection, Chicago, 111.* 

OSHi Clark County Historical Society, Springfield, Ohio 

OrHi Oregon Historical Society, Portland, Ore. 

PHC Haverford College Library, Haverford, Pa. 

PHi Historical Society of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pa. 

* After the Collected Works was in press, the collection of the late Oliver R. 
Barrett was sold at auction by Parke-Bernet Galleries (Catalog 1315) on Feb- 
ruary 19-20, 1952. It has been impossible to trace all new owners of the moie 
than two hundred items, and impracticable to change the source citations for 
those which are known, but many of the more important items went to such 
well-known collections as those in the Library of Congress (Debates Scrapbook, 
purchased for the Alfred Whital Stern Collection) and Illinois State Historica 
.Library (letters to Joshua F. Speed, etc.). 

[ viii ] 



SOURCES 

PMA Allegheny College Library, Meadville, Pa. 

PP Free Library of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pa. 

PPDrop Dropsie College Library, Philadelphia, Pa. 

PSt Pennsylvania State College Library, State College, Pa. 

PU University of Pennsylvania Library, Philadelphia, Pa. 

RPAB Annmary Brown Memorial Library, Providence, R. L 

RPB Brown University Library, Providence, R. I. 

THaroL Lincoln Memorial University, Harrogate, Tenn. 

THi Tennessee Historical Society, Nashville, Tenn. 

ViU University of Virginia Library, Charlottesville, Va. 

VtU University of Vermont Library, Burlington, Vt. 

WBeloHi Beloit Historical Society, Beloit, Wis. 

WHi State Historical Society of Wisconsin, Madison, Wis. 

WvU West Virginia University Library, Morgantown, W. 
Va. 



[ix] 




JUNE 3, 1860 
By Alexander Hesler 



THE COLLECTED WORKS OF 

ABRAHAM LINCOLN 



THE COLLECTED WORKS OF 

ABRAHAM LINCOLN 



Notes for Speech at Hartford, Connecticut 1 

[March 5, 1860] 

SIGINTS OF DECAY BUSHWHACKING 
IRREPRESSIBLE CONFLICT 

JOHIST 



SBCOETRADE 

True, or not true. 
If true, what? 
Mason 
Plasters. 

If not true, what? 
[Illegible] is the question. 
We must deal with it. 
Magnitude of question. 
What prevents just now? 
Right wrong indifference 
Indifference unphilosophical 

Because nobody is indifferent 
Must be converted to 
Can be, or can not be done. 
I suppose can not. 
But if can, what result? 
Indifference, then, must be rejected. 
And what supported? 
Sectionalism 
Conservatism 
John Brown 

Conclusion 

i Angle, pp. 239-40. According to Angle's note a newspaper reporter found 
the sheet of notes lying on a table in the City Hall after the speech and pre- 
served it. 

[i] 



Speech at Hartford, Connecticut 1 

March 5, 1860 
[Daily Courant Version] 

Whether we will have it so or not, the slave question is the pre- 
vailing question before the nation. Though it may be true, and 
probably is true, that all parties, factions and individuals desire it 
should be settled, it still goes on unsettled the all-prevailing and 
all-pervading question of the day. Hardly any other great ques- 
tion, however important it may have appeared, has been before 
the country several years, that had the power so to excite the pub- 
lic mind as this question of slavery. It has been so for six years, 
and before this received considerable consideration. It is in reality, 
older. It was rife before the Revolution, even. But it was settled, 
apparently. It has been settled many times; but each time it has 
risen it has come higher and higher. It has been coming up and 
going down. Its last rise was in January, 1854; it rose then higher 
than any former time, but this has never subsided. Otherwise than 
this, it grows more and more in magnitude and importance. 

Two years ago, I said in a speech in Illinois, "We are now in 
the fifth year of an inauguration of a policy which was to settle 
this question satisfactorily, but we have not seen the end." It may 
now be added that since the winter of 1857-8, when the Lecornp- 
ton imbroglio was created, those who then brought up the ques- 
tion have never been able to see the end. It characterized all the 
speeches, that the policy they had adopted "was working well, and 
we were just at the end of it, notwithstanding the efforts of Aboli- 
tionists to continue it along. We are just getting rid of this vexed 
question; and the tail of this hideous creature is just going out of 
sight." 

Now we hear no more of this; and the question arises, "Why 
can't this question which we all desire so much to be settled, be 
satisfactorily arranged?" The reason is, that while we all agree 
that we want it settled, one faction wants to settle it one way, a 
second has a different plan, and a third still another. Each pulls in 
a different direction. All desire its settlement, but differ in the 
method of doing it; and none of them being in a decided majority 
have ever been able to accomplish the object. 

1 Hartford Daily Courant, March 6, 1860; Hartford Evening Press, March 6, 
1860. Both versions are reproduced. Neither is clearly superior to the other as a 
whole, and each contains passages not in the other. An attempt to collate the two 
versions proved to he so unwieldy and saved so little space that it has been aban- 
doned in favor of reproduction of both sources. Typographical errors have been 
corrected by the editors, but the reports are otherwise unchanged. 

[2] 



MARCH 5, i860 

I think one great mistake is made by them all. I think our wisest 
men have made this mistake. They underrate its importance, and 
a settlement can never be effected until its magnitude is properly 
estimated. Until we do this, the means of settlement will never be 
properly estimated. Now what is the difficulty? One-sixth of the 
population of the United States is slave. One man of every six, one 
woman of every six, one child of every six, is a slave. Those who 
own them look upon them as property, and nothing else. They 
contemplate them as property, and speak of them as such. The 
slaves have the same "property quality," in the minds of then- 
owners, as any other property. The entire value of the slave popu- 
lation of the United States, is, at a moderate estimate, not less than 
$2,000,000,000. This amount of property has a vast influence upon 
the minds of those who own it. The same amount of property 
owned by Northern men has the same influence upon their minds. 
In this we do not assume that we are better than the people of the 
South neither do we admit that they are better than we. We are 
not better, barring circumstances, than they. Public opinion is 
formed relative to a property basis. Therefore, the slaveholders 
battle any policy which depreciates their slaves as property. What 
increases the value of this property, they favor. When you tell 
them that slavery is immoral, they rebel, because they do not like 
to be told they are interested in an institution which is not a moral 
one. When you enter into a defence of slavery, they seize upon it, 
for they like justification. The result is, that public opinion is 
formed among them which insists upon the encouragement or pro- 
tection, the enlargement or perpetuation of slavery and secures 
them property in the slave. 

Now this comes in conflict with this proposition that we at the 
North view slavery as a wrong. We understand that the "equality 
of man" principle which actuated our forefathers in the establish- 
ment of the government is right; and that slavery, being directly 
opposed to this, is morally wrong. I think that if anything can be 
proved by natural theology, it is that slavery is morally wrong. 
God gave man a mouth to receive bread, hands to feed it, and his 
hand has a right to carry bread to his mouth without controversy. 

We suppose slavery is wrong, and that it endangers the perpe- 
tuity of the Union. Nothing else menaces it. Its effect on free labor 
makes it what Seward has been so roundly abused for calling, an 
irrepressible conflict. Almost every man has a sense of certain 
things being wrong, and at the same time, a sense of its pecuniary 
value. These conflict in the mind, and make a riddle of a man. If 
slavery is considered upon a property basis, public opinion must 

T31 



MARCH 5, i860 

be forced to its support. The alternative is its settlement upon the 
basis of its being wrong. Some men think it is a question of neither 
right or wrong; that it is a question of dollars and cents, only; that 
the Almighty has drawn a line across the country, south of which 
the land is always to be cultivated by slave labor; when the ques- 
tion is between the white man and the nigger, they go in for the 
white man; when it is between the nigger and the crocodile, they 
take sides with the nigger. There is effort to make this feeling of 
indifference prevalent in the country, and this is one of the things, 
perhaps, that prevents the sudden settlement of the question. Is it 
possible that a national policy can be sustained because nobody 
opposes or favors it? It may answer to serve the ends of politicians 
for a while, but it falls at last. There may be one way, however, 
to make it stand, and that is to make the opinion of the people 
conform to it; must be made to conclude that those who want slav- 
ery shall have it, and that it is simply a matter of dollars and cents. 
I do not believe a majority of the people of this nation can be made 
to take this view of it. 

Is there any man of the Democratic party, especially the "Doug- 
las wing," but will say that in his opinion the Declaration of In- 
dependence has no application to the negro? I have asked this 
question many times during the past three years, and no Democrat 
has yet denied that this was his belief, though I have asked it al- 
ways where people are in the habit of answering their speakers 
when they please. So I assume this to be their belief to-day; and I 
tell you, you are safe to offer a premium to any man who will show 
you a Democrat who said so five years ago, I avow I never heard 
it from any man until I heard it from the lips of Judge Douglas. 
I had, to be sure, in certain portions of the country, heard men 
say something to this effect, but they didn't sneak around it with 
any statement like this. They took the bull by the horns, and said 
the Declaration of Independence wasn't true! Judge Taney might 
have first broached the doctrine. Perhaps he did; but I heard it 
first from Judge Douglas, though it was after Taney's Dred Scott 
decision. If so, Douglas possibly got it from him. Here's half the 
people of this nation saying what they would -not have said five 
years ago; taking man from his kind and placing him among the 
brutes. This is a long stride towards bringing about this feeling 
of indifference in the minds of the people of this country. One 
more such stride and the object would be reached. 

The proposition that there is a struggle between the white man 
and the negro contains a falsehood. There is no struggle between 
them. It assumes that unless the white man enslaves the negro, the 

[4] 



MARCH 5 9 i860 

negro will enslave the white man. In that case, I think I would go 
for enslaving the black man, in preference to being enslaved my- 
self. As the learned Judge of a certain Court is said to have de- 
cided "When a ship is wrecked at sea, and two men seize upon 
one plank which is capable of sustaining but one of them, either 
of them can rightfully push the other off!" There is, however, no 
such controversy here. They say that between the nigger and the 
crocodile they go for the nigger. The proportion, therefore, is, that 
as the crocodile to the nigger so is the nigger to the white man. 

They tell us that they desire the people of a territory to vote 
slavery out or in as they please. But who will form the opinion of 
the people there? The territories may be settled by emigrants from 
the free States, who will go there with this feeling of indifference. 
The question arises, "slavery or freedom?" Caring nothing about 
it, they let it come in, and that is the end of it. It is the surest way 
of nationalizing the institution. Just as certain, but more danger- 
ous because more insidious; but it is leading us there just as cer- 
tainly and as surely as Jeff. Davis himself would have us go. 

If, then, we of the Republican party who think slavery is a 
wrong, and would mould public opinion to the fact that it is 
wrong, should get the control of the general government, I do not 
say we would or should meddle with it where it exists; but we 
could inaugurate a policy which would treat it as a wrong, and 
prevent its extension. 

For instance, out in the street, or in the field, or on the prairie 
I find a rattlesnake. I take a stake and kill him. Everybody would 
applaud the act and say I did right. But suppose the snake was in 
a bed where children were sleeping. Would I do right to strike him 
there? I might hurt the children; or I might not kill, but only 
arouse and exasperate the snake, and he might bite the children. 
Thus, by meddling with him here, I would do more hurt than good. 
Slavery is like this. We dare not strike at it where it is. The man- 
ner in which our constitution is framed constrains us from making 
war upon it where it already exists. The question that we now 
have to deal with is, "Shall we be acting right to take this snake 
and carry it to a bed where there are children?" The Republican 
party insists upon keeping it out of the bed. 

Again: I met Mr. Cassius M. Clay in the cars at New Haven 
one day last week, and it was my first opportunity to take him 
by the hand. There was an old gentleman in the car, seated in 
front of us, whose coat collar was turned far down upon the shoul- 
ders. I saw directly that he had a large wen on his neck. I said to 
Mr. Clay, That wen represents slavery; it bears the same relation 

[5] 



MARCH 5, i 8 b o 

to that man that slavery does to the country. That wen is a great 
evil; the man that bears it will say so. But he does not dare to cut 
it out. He bleeds to death if he does, directly. If he does 720* cut 
it out; it will shorten his life materially. 

This is only applicable to men who think slavery is wrong. 
Those who think it right, of course will look upon the rattlesnake 
as a jewel, and call the wen an ornament. I suppose the only way 
to get rid of it is, for those who think it wrong, to work together, 
and to vote no longer with the Democracy who love it so well. 

Do you who think slavery is wrong, but still vote with the De- 
mocracy, act towards it as you do towards any other thing yoxi 
consider wrong? I think not; on the contrary, you find fault with 
those who denounce it. In your view of the case it must not be 
discussed at all. In your view it must not be spoken of in the free 
States, because slavery is 770;? there; nor in the slave States, becaxise 
it is there; you do not want it brought into politics because it stirs 
up agitation; you do not want to hear of it from the pulpit be- 
cause it is not religion; you do not want to take it into your Tract 
Societies because it creates disturbance there. 

Are you consistent in this? You say that if the South themselves 
desire to stir the question, you wish them God-speed in it. Are you 
certain of that? In 1858 Frank P. Blair of Missouri did just this 
thing for his State. He went into the fight, and was a candidate for 
Congress. He was beaten; and when you heard of his defeat did 
you hang your heads in sorrow? I reckon not! I guess \ that you 
threw your hat into the air and shouted, "Hurrah! for Democ- 
racy!" (Mr. Lincoln then proceeded to speak of the provision in 
the constitution which permitted the slave trade to continue 20 
years. Although it was not expressly so stated, it was understood 
by the framers of that instrument that it was to have been abol- 
ished at the end of that time. He argued that if they had not con- 
sidered slavery a wrong, they would not have thus limited the 
time of supply.) He continued: 

I think the Democracy are pretty generally getting into a sys- 
tem of bushwhackery in this controversy. You all know how Sew- 
ard has been abused for his "irrepressible conflict" doctrine. The 
Democracy have repeated it over, and over, and over again; I call 
this bushwhackery because they have been reminded time after 
time, but could never be made to admit, that the old fathers said 
the same thing. They dare not deny it because they know the proof 
is ready at your hands to meet their denial. Jefferson said it; Wash- 
ington said it. Before Seward said it, the same statement was made 
by Pryor of Virginia in his Richmond Enquirer, the leading paper 

[6] 



MARCH 5, i860 

of his State. Pryor is sent to Washington and Douglas hugs him to 
his bosom, but goes into fits of hydrophobia at Seward's enuncia- 
tion of the same doctrine which was preached by his Virginia 
friend. 

Another species of bushwhacking is exhibited in their treatment 
of the John Brown and Harper's Ferry affair. They insist upon 
it that the Republican party incites insurrections. Did they, can 
they ever prove their statement? They tried it in the Senate Inves- 
tigation Committee and failed, but they keep saying it. "We have 
not been fairly dealt with in this matter. We need not [have] ex- 
pected that we would have been. There was some State elections 
to come off soon afterwards. They had just passed through elec- 
tions in other States, and been whipped out. They were glad this 
occurred at Harper's Ferry. They said to each other "Jump in 
noufs your chance!" They were sorry there were not more killed; 
but taking it as they found it, they howled over it. The elections 
came off, but they did not result as the Democracy had expected. 
Each Republican knew that the charge that his party had incited 
the insurrection was, so far as he was concerned, a slander upon 
him. That is ray philosophy of the result of the elections which 
ensued. The Democracy is still at work upon John Brown and 
Harper's Ferry, charging the Republicans with the crime of in- 
stigating the proceedings there; and if they think they are able to 
slander a woman into loving them, or a man into voting with 
them, they will learn better presently. 

Now they are going to work at the shoe strike. I don't know that 
it comes into Connecticut. It goes into New Hampshire. A Demo- 
cratic Senator gets up in the Senate Chamber and pompously 
announces that "I cannot dawt thot this strike is the thresult of the 
onforchunit wahfar brought aboat boy this sucktional contro- 
vussy!" Now whether this is so or not, I know one thing there is 
a strikel And I am glad to know- that there is a system of labor 
where the laborer can strike if he wants to! I would to God that 
such a system prevailed all over the world. 

Now this strike is caused by a withdrawal of Southern trade, 
or it is not. If it is, what can you do to help it? Have you ever 
made war upon the South? No. Then how can you help yourselves? 
They withdraw their trade on a false accusation, because you 
never warred upon them, and consequently cannot stop the war 
they charge you with. You can, however, conform to their idea 
that slavery is right. This will satisfy them, but what is the effect 
on you? Why slavery comes in upon youl Public opinion against it 
gives way. The barriers which protected you from it are down; 

[7] 



MARCH 5, i860 

slavery comes in, and white free labor that can strike will give 
way to slave labor that cannot I 

******* 

The Republicans want to see all parts of the Union in harmony 
with one another. Let us do our duty, but let us look to what our 
duty is, and do nothing except after due deliberation. Let us de- 
termine, if we can, what will satisfy the South. Will they be 
satisfied that we surrender the territories to them unconditionally? 
No. If we promise never to instigate an invasion upon slavery? No. 
Equally without avail is the fact that they have found nothing to 
detect us in doing them any wrong. "What then? We must say that 
slavery is right; we must vote for Douglas's new Sedition laws; we 
must withdraw our statement that slavery is wrong. If a slave runs 
away, they overlook the natural causes which impelled him to the 
act; do not remember the oppression or the lashes he received, but 
charge us with instigating him to flight. If he screams when 
whipped, they say it is not caused by the pains he suffers, but he 
screams because we instigate him to outcrying. We do let them 
alone, to be sure, but they object to our saying anything against 
their system. They do not ask us to change our free State constitu- 
tions, but they will yet do that. After demanding "what they do, 
and as they do, they cannot stop short of this. They may be justi- 
fied in this, believing, as they do, that slavery is right, and a social 
blessing. We cannot act otherwise than we do, believing that slav- 
ery is wrong. If it is right, we may not contract its limits. If it is 
wrong, they cannot ask us to extend it. Upon these different views, 
hinges the whole controversy. Thinking it right, they are justified 
in asking its protection; thinking it wrong, we cannot consent to 
vote for it, or to let it extend itself. If our sense of duty forbids this 
extension, let us do that duty. This contrivance of a middle ground 
is such that he who occupies it is neither a dead or a living man. 
Their "Union" contrivances are not for us, for they reverse the 
scriptural order and call the righteous, not sinners to repentance. 
They ask men who never had an aspiration except for the Union, 
to swear fealty to the Union. Let us not be slandered from our 
duties, or intimidated from preserving our dignity and our rights 
by any menace; but let us have faith that Bight, Eternal Right 
makes might, and as we understand our duty, so do it! 

[Evening Press Version] 

Slavery is the great political question of the nation. Though all 
desire its settlement, it still remains the all-pervading question of 

[8] 



MARCH 5, i860 

the day. It has been so especially for the past six years. It is in- 
deed older than the revolution, rising, subsiding, then rising again, 
till '54, since which time it has been constantly augmenting. Those 
who occasioned the Lecompton imbroglio now admit that they see 
no end to it. It had been their cry that the vexed question was just 
about to be settled "the tail of this hideous creature is just going 
out of sight." That cry is "played out," and has ceased. 

Why, when all desire to have this controversy settled, can we 
not settle it satisfactorily? One reason is, we want it settled in 
different ways. Each faction has a different plan they pull dif- 
ferent ways, and neither has a decided majority. In my humble 
opinion, the importance and magnitude of the question is under- 
rated, even by our wisest men. If I be right, the first thing is to 
get a just estimate of the evil then we can provide a cure. 

One-sixth, and a little more, of the population of the United 
States are slaves looked upon as property, as nothing but prop- 
erty. The cash value of these slaves, at a moderate estimate, is 
$2,000,000,000. This amount of property value has a vast influence 
on the minds of its owners, very naturally. The same amount of 
property would have an equal influence upon us if owned in the 
North. Human nature is the same people at the South are the 
same as those at the North, barring the difference in circum- 
stances. Public opinion is founded, to a great extent, on a property 
basis. What lessens the value of property is opposed, what en- 
hances its value is favored. Public opinion at the South regards 
slaves as property and insists upon treating them like other prop- 
erty. 

On the other hand, the free states carry on their government on 
the principle of the equality of men. We think slavery is morally 
wrong, and a direct violation of that principle. We all think it 
wrong. It is clearly proved, I think, by natural theology, apart 
from revelation. Every man, black, white or yellow, has a mouth 
to be fed and two hands with which to feed it and that bread 
should be allowed to go to that mouth without controversy. (Ap- 
plause.) 

Slavery is wrong in its effect upon white people and free labor; 
it is the only thing that threatens the Union. It makes what Sen- 
ator Seward has been much abused for calling an "irrepressible 
conflict." When they get ready to settle it, we hope they will let 
us know. Public opinion settles every question here any policy to 
be permanent must have public opinion at the bottom something 
in accordance with the philosophy of the human mind as it is. The 
property basis will have its weight the love of property and a 

[9] 



MARCH 5, i860 

consciousness of right or wrong have conflicting places in our or- 
ganization, which often make a man's course seem crooked his 
conduct a riddle. 

Some men would make it a question of indifference neither 
right nor wrong merely a question of dollars and cents the Al- 
mighty has drawn a line across the land, below which it must be 
cultivated by slave labor, above which by free labor. They would 
say: "If the question is between the white man and the negro, I 
am for the white man; if between the negro and the crocodile, I 
am for the negro." There is a strong effort to make this policy of 
indifference prevail, but it can not be a durable one, A "don't care" 
policy won't prevail, for every body does care. 

Is there a Democrat, especially one of the Douglas wing, but 
will declare that the Declaration of Independence has no applica- 
tion to the negro? It -would be safe to offer a moderate premium 
for such a man. I have asked this question in large audiences where 
they were in the habit of answering right out, but no one would 
say otherwise. Not one of them said it five years ago. I never heard 
it till I heard it from the lips of Judge Douglas. True, some men 
boldly took the bull by the horns and said the Declaration of In- 
dependence was not true! They didn't sneak around the question. 
I say I heard first from Douglas that the Declaration did not apply 
to black men. Not a man of them said it till then they all say it 
now. This is a long stride towards establishing the policy of in- 
difference one more such stride, I think, would do it. 

The proposition that there is a struggle between the white man 
and the negro contains a falsehood. There is no struggle. // there 
was, I should be for the white man. If two men are adrift at sea 
on a plank which will bear up but one, the law justifies either in 
pushing the other off. I never had to struggle to keep a negro from 
enslaving me, nor did a negro ever have to fight to keep me from 
enslaving him. They say, between the crocodile and the negro they 
go for the negro. The logical proportion is therefore; as a white 
man is to a negro, so is a negro to a crocodile; or, as the negro may 
treat the crocodile, so the white man may treat the negro. The 
don't care policy leads just as surely to nationalising slavery as 
Jeff. Davis himself, but the doctrine is more dangerous because 
more insidious. 

If the Republicans, who think slavery is wrong, get possession 
of the general government, we may not root out the evil at once, 
but may at least prevent its extension. If I find a venomous snake 
lying on the open prairie, I seize the first stick and kill him at once. 
But if that snake is in bed with my children, I must be more cau- 

[10] 



MARCH 5, i860 

tious I shall, in striking the snake, also strike the children, or 
arouse the reptile to bite the children. Slavery is the venomous 
snake in bed with the children. But if the question is whether to 
kill it on the prairie or put it in bed ivith other children., I think 
we'd kill it! (Cheers and laughter.) 

Another illustration. When for the first time I met Mr. Clay, the 
other day in the cars, in front of us sat an old gentleman with an 
enormous wen upon his neck. Everybody would say the wen was 
a great evil, and would cause the man's death after a while but 
you couldn't cut it out, for he'd bleed to death in a minute. But 
would you engraft the seeds of that iven on the necks of sound and 
healthy men? He must endure and be patient, hoping for possible 
relief. The wen represents slavery on the neck of this country. 
This only applies to those who think slavery is wrong. Those who 
think it right would consider the snake a jewel, and the wen an 
ornament. 

"We want those (democrats) who think slavery wrong to quit 
voting with those who think it right. They don't treat it as they 
do other wrongs they won't oppose it in the free states for it 
isn't there, nor in the slave states for it is there; don't want it in 
politics, for it makes agitation; not in the pulpit, for it isn't reli- 
gion; not in a Tract Society, for it makes a fuss there is no place 
for its discussion. Are they quite consistent in this? 

If those democrats really think slavery wrong they will be much 
pleased when earnest men in the slave states take up a plan of 
gradual emancipation and go to work energetically and very kind- 
ly to get rid of the evil. Now let us test them. Frank Blair tried it; 
and he ran for Congress in '58, and got beaten. Did the democracy 
feel bad about it? I reckon not I guess you all flung up your hats 
and shouted "Hurrah for the Democracy!" (Laughter three 
cheers for Blair and three for Clay.) 

He went on to speak of the manner in which slavery was treated 
by the Constitution. The word "slave" is no where used; the supply 
of slaves was to be prohibited after 1808; they stopped the spread 
of it in the territories; seven of the states abolished it. He argued 
very conclusively that it was then regarded as an evil which 
would eventually be got rid of, and that they desired, once rid of 
it, to have nothing in the constitution to remind them of it. The 
Republicans go back to first principles and deal with it as a wrong. 
Mason, 2 of Va., said openly that the framers of our government 
were anti-slavery. Hammond 3 of S. C., said "Washington set this 
evil example." Bully Brooks 4 said: "At the time the Constitution 

2 James M. Mason. B James H. Hammond. 4 Preston S. Brooks. 



MARCH 5, i860 

was formed, no one supposed slavery would last till now." We 
stick to the policy of our fathers. 

The Democracy are given to "bushwhacking." After having their 
errors and mis-statements continually thrust in their faces, they 
pay no heed, but go on howling about Seward and the "irrepres- 
sible conflict." That is "bushwhacking." So with John Brown and 
Harper's Ferry. They charge it upon the Republican party and 
ignominiously fail in all attempts to substantiate the charge. Yet 
they go on with their bushwhacking, the pack in full cry after 
John Brown. 

The democrats had just been whipped in Ohio and Pennsyl- 
vania, and seized upon the unfortunate Harper's Ferry affair to 
influence other elections then pending. They said to each other, 
"Jump in now's your chance;" and were sorry there were not 
more killed. But they didn't succeed well. Let them go on with 
their howling. They will succeed when by slandering women you 
get them to love you, and by slandering men you get them to vote 
for you. (Great applause.) 

Mr. Lincoln then took up the Massachusetts shoemakers' strike, 
treating it in a humorous and philosophical manner, and exposing 
to ridicule the foolish pretence of Senator Douglas that the strike 
arose from "this unfortunate sectional warfare." Mr. Lincoln 
thanked God that we have a system of labor where there can be a 
strike. Whatever the pressure, there is a point where the workman 
may stop. (Applause and cheers for free labor.) 

He didn't pretend to be familiar with the subject of the shoe 
strike probably knew as little about it as Senator Douglas him- 
self. This strike has occurred as the Senator says, or it has not. 
Shall we stop making war upon the South? We never have made 
war upon them. If any one has, [he] better go and hang himself 
and save Virginia the trouble. If you give up your convictions and 
call slavery right as they do, you let slavery in upon you instead 
of white laborers who can strike, you'll soon have black laborers 
who carft strike. 

I have heard that in consequence of this "sectional warfare," as 
Douglas calls it, Senator Mason of Va., had appeared in a suit of 
homespun. Now up in New Hampshire, the woolen and cotton 
mills are all busy, and there is no strike they are busy making 
the very goods Senator Mason has quit buying! To carry out his 
idea, he ought to go barefoot] If that's the plan, they should begin 
at the foundation, and adopt the well-known "Georgia costume" of 
a shirt-collar and pair of spurs! ("Irrepressible" laughter and ap- 
plause.) 

[12] 



MARCH 6, i860 

It reminded him of the man who had a poor old lean, bony, spav- 
ined horse, with swelled legs. He was asked what he was going 
to do with such a miserable beast the poor creature would die. 
"Do?" said he. 'Tm going to fat him up; don't you see that I have 
got him seal fat as high as the knees?" (Roars of laughter.) Well, 
they've got the Union dissolved up to the ankle, but no farther! 
(Applause and laughter.) 

All portions of this confederacy should act in harmony and 
with careful deliberation. The democrats cry John Brown invasion. 
We are guiltless of it, but our denial does not satisfy them. Noth- 
ing will satisfy them but disinfecting the atmosphere entirely of 
all opposition to slavery. They have not demanded of us to yield 
the guards of liberty in our state constitutions, but it will naturally 
come to that after a while. If we give up to them, we cannot re- 
fuse even their utmost request. If slavery is right, it ought to be 
extended; if not, it ought to be restricted there is no middle 
ground. Wrong as we think it, we can afford to let it alone where 
it of necessity now exists; but we cannot afford to extend it into 
free territory and around our own homes. Let us stand against 
it! 

The "Union" arrangements are all a humbug they reverse the 
scriptural order, calling the righteous and not sinners to repent- 
ance. Let us not be slandered or intimidated to turn from our duty. 
Eternal right makes might as we understand our duty, let us do 
it! 



Speech, at New Haven-, Connecticut 1 

March 6, 1860 

MR. PRESIDENT AND FELLOW-CITIZENS OF NEW HAVEN: If the 
Republican party of this nation shall ever have the national house 
entrusted to its keeping, it will be the duty of that party to attend 
to all the affairs of national house-keeping. Whatever matters of 
importance may come up, whatever difficulties may arise in the 
way of its administration of the government, that party will then 
have to attend to. It will then be compelled to attend to other ques- 

1 New Haven Daily Palladium, March 7, 1860. The editors have corrected a 
few typographical errors in the remarkably well printed Palladium text. Brackets 
are in the source unless otherwise noted. Newspaper comment on the speeches at 
Meriden, Connecticut (March 7), Woonsocket, Rhode Island (March 8), Norwich 
and Bridgeport, Connecticut (March 9 and io) 7 indicate that Lincoln repeated 
this speech substantially at each place, and the only complete report of any of 
them. the speech at Norwich printed in the Norwich Weekly Courier , March 15 
is admittedly a copy of the Palladium's report of the New Haven speech. 

[13] 



MARCH 6 9 i860 

tions, besides this question which now assumes an overwhelming 
importance the question of Slavery. It is true that in the organi- 
zation of the Republican party this question of Slavery was more 
important than any other; indeed, so much more important has it 
become that no other national question can even get a hearing just 
at present. The old question of tariff a matter that will remain 
one of the chief affairs of national housekeeping to all time the 
question of the management of financial affairs; the question of 
the disposition of the public domain how shall it be managed for 
the purpose of getting it well settled, and of making there the 
homes of a free and happy people these will remain open and 
require attention for a great while yet, and these questions will 
have to be attended to by whatever party has the control of the 
government. Yet, just now, they cannot even obtain a hearing, and 
I do not purpose to detain you upon these topics, or what sort of 
hearing they should have when opportunity shall come. 

For, whether we will or not, the question of Slavery is the ques- 
tion, the all absorbing topic of the day. It is true that all of us 
and by that I mean, not the Republican party alone, but the whole 
American people, here and elsewhere all of us wish this question 
settled wish it out of the way. It stands in the way, and prevents 
the adjustment, and the giving of necessary attention to other 
questions of national house-keeping. The people of the whole nation 
agree that this question ought to be settled, and yet it is not settled. 
And the reason is that they are not yet agreed how it shall be set- 
tled. All wish it done, but some wish one way and some another, 
and some a third, or fourth, or fifth; different bodies are pulling in 
different directions, and none of them having a decided majority, 
are able to accomplish the common object. 

In the beginning of the year 1854 a new policy was inaugurated 
with the avowed object and confident promise that it would entire- 
ly and forever put an end to the Slavery agitation. It was again 
and again declared that under this policy, when once successfully 
established, the country would be forever rid of this whole ques- 
tion. Yet under the operation of that policy this agitation has not 
only not ceased, but it has been constantly augmented. And this 
too, although, from the day of its introduction, its friends, who 
promised that it would wholly end all agitation, constantly insisted, 
down to the time that the Lecompton bill was introduced, that it 
was working admirably, and that its inevitable tendency was to 
remove the question forever from the politics of the country. Can 
you call to mind any Democratic speech, made after the repeal of 
the Missouri Compromise, down to the time of the Lecompton bill, 

[14] 



MARCH 6, i860 

in which it was not predicted that the Slavery agitation was just 
at an end; that "the abolition excitement was played out," "the 
Kansas question was dead," "they have made the most they can 
out of this question and it is now forever settled." But since the 
Lecompton bill no Democrat, within my experience, has ever pre- 
tended that he could see the end. That cry has been dropped. They 
themselves do not pretend, now, that the agitation of this subject 
has come to an end yet. [Applause.] 

The truth is, that this question is one of national importance, 
and we cannot help dealing with it: we must do something about 
it, whether we will or not. We cannot avoid it; the subject is one 
we cannot avoid considering; we can no more avoid it than a man 
can live without eating. It is upon us; it attaches to the body pol- 
itic as much and as closely as the natural wants attach to our 
natural bodies. Now I think it important that this matter should 
be taken up in earnest, and really settled. And one way to bring 
about a true settlement of the question is to understand its true 
magnitude. 

There have been many efforts to settle it. Again and again it has 
been fondly hoped that it was settled, but every time it breaks out 
afresh, and more violently than ever. It was settled, our fathers 
hoped, by the Missouri Compromise, but it did not stay settled. 
Then the compromises of 1850 were declared to be a full and final 
settlement of the question. The two great parties, each in Na- 
tional Convention, adopted resolutions declaring that the settle- 
ment made by the Compromise of 1850 was a finality that it 
would last forever. Yet how long before it was unsettled again! It 
broke out again in 1854, and blazed higher and raged more furi- 
ously than ever before, and the agitation has not rested since. 

These repeated settlements must have some fault about them. 
There must be some inadequacy in their very nature to the pur- 
pose for which they were designed. We can only speculate as to 
where that fault that inadequacy, is, but we may perhaps prof- 
it by past experience. 

I think that one of the causes of these repeated failures is that 
our best and greatest men have greatly underestimated the size of 
this question. They have constantly brought f orward small cures 
for great sores plasters too small to cover the wound. That is one 
reason that all settlements have proved so temporary so evanes- 
cent. [Applause.] 

Look at the magnitude of this subject! One sixth of our popula- 
tion, in round numbers not quite one sixth, and yet more than 
a seventh, about one sixth of the whole population of the United 

[15] 



MARCH 6 ? i860 

States are slaves! The owners of these slaves consider them prop- 
erty. The effect upon the minds of the owners is that of property, 
and nothing else it induces them to insist upon all that will favor- 
ably affect its value as property, to demand laws and institutions 
and a public policy that shall increase and secure its value, and 
make it durable, lasting and universal. The effect on the minds of 
the owners is to persuade them that there is no wrong in it. The 
slaveholder does not like to be considered a mean fellow, for hold- 
ing that species of property, and hence he has to struggle within 
himself and sets about arguing himself into the belief that Slav- 
ery is right. The property influences his mind. The dissenting min- 
ister, who argued some theological point with one of the established 
church, was always met by the reply, "I can't see it so." He opened 
the Bible, and pointed him to a passage, but the orthodox minister 
replied, "I can't see it so." Then he showed him a single word 
"Can you see that?" "Yes, I see it," was the reply. The dissenter 
laid a guinea over the word and asked, "Do you see it now?" 
[Great laughter.] So here. Whether the owners of this species of 
property do really see it as it is, it is not for me to say, but if they 
do, they see it as it is through 12,000,000,000 of dollars, and that is 
a pretty thick coating. [Laughter.] Certain it is, that they do not 
see it as we see it. Certain it is, that this two thousand million of 
dollars, invested in this species of property, all so concentrated that 
the mind can grasp it at once this immense pecuniary interest, 
has its influence upon their minds. 

But here in Connecticut and at the North Slavery does not exist, 
and we see it through no such medium. To us it appears natural 
to think that slaves are human beings; men, not property; that 
some of the things, at least, stated about men in the Declaration of 
Independence apply to them as well as to us. [Applause.] I say, 
we think, most of us, that this Charter of Freedom applies to the 
slave as well as to ourselves, that the class of arguments put for- 
ward to batter down that idea, are also calculated to break down 
the very idea of a free government, even for white men, and to 
undermine the very foundations of free society. [Continued ap- 
plause.] We think Slavery a great moral wrong, and while we do 
not claim the right to touch it where it exists, we wish to treat it 
as a wrong in the Territories, where our votes will reach it. We 
think that a respect for ourselves, a regard for future generations 
and for the God that made us, require that we put down this wrong 
where our votes will properly reach it. We think that species of 
labor an injury to free white men in short, we think Slavery a 
great moral, social and political evil, tolerable only because, and 

[16] 



MARCH 6, i860 

so far as its actual existence makes it necessary to tolerate it, and 
that beyond that, it ought to be treated as a wrong. 

Now these two ideas, the property idea that Slavery is right, 
and the idea that it is wrong, come into collision, and do actually 
produce that irrepressible conflict which Mr. Seward has been so 
roundly abused for mentioning. The two ideas conflict, and must 
conflict. 

Again, in its political aspect, does anything in any way endanger 
the perpetuity of this Union but that single thing, Slavery? Many 
of our adversaries are anxious to claim that they are specially 
devoted to the Union, and take pains to charge upon us hostility 
to the Union. Now we claim that we are the only true Union men, 
and we put to them this one proposition: What ever endangered 
this Union, save and except Slavery? Did any other thing ever 
cause a moment's fear? All men must agree that this thing alone has 
ever endangered the perpetuity of the Union. But if it was threat- 
ened by any other influence, would not all men say that the best 
thing that could be done, if we could not or ought not to destroy it, 
would be at least to keep it from growing any larger? Can any 
man believe that the way to save the Union is to extend and in- 
crease the only thing that threatens the Union, and to suffer it to 
grow bigger and bigger? [Great applause.] 

"Whenever this question shall be settled, it must be settled on 
some philosophical basis. No policy that does not rest upon some 
philosophical public opinion can be permanently maintained. And 
hence, there are but two policies in regard to Slavery that can be 
at all maintained. The first, based on the property view that Slav- 
ery is right, conforms to that idea throughout, and demands that 
we shall do everything for it that we ought to do if it were right. 
We must sweep away all opposition, for opposition to the right is 
wrong; we must agree that Slavery is right, and we must adopt the 
idea that property has persuaded the owner to believe that Slav- 
ery is morally right and socially elevating. This gives a philo- 
sophical basis for a permanent policy of encouragement. 

The other policy is one that squares with the idea that Slavery 
is wrong, and it consists in doing everything that we ought to do 
if it is wrong. Now, I don't wish to be misunderstood, nor to leave 
a gap down to be misrepresented, even. I don't mean that we ought 
to attack it where it exists. To me it seems that if we were to form 
a government anew, in view of the actual presence of Slavery we 
should find it necessary to frame just such a government as our 
fathers did; giving to the slaveholder the entire control where the 
system was established, while we possessed the power to restrain 

[17] 



MARCH 6, i860 

it from going outside those limits. [Applause.] From the necessities 
of the case we should be compelled to form just such a govern- 
ment as our blessed fathers gave us; and, surely, if they have so 
made it, that adds another reason why we should let Slavery alone 
where it exists. 

If I saw a venomous snake crawling in the road, any man would 
say I might seize the nearest stick and kill it; but if I found that 
snake in bed with my children, that would be another question. 
[Laughter.] I might hurt the children more than the snake, and 
it might bite them. [Applause.] Much more, if I found it in bed 
with my neighbor's children, and I had bound myself by a solemn 
compact not to meddle with his children under any circumstances, 
it would become me to let that particular mode of getting rid of 
the gentleman alone. [Great laughter.] But if there was a bed 
newly made up, to which the children were to be taken, and it 
was proposed to take a batch of young snakes and put them there 
with them, I take it no man would say there was any question how 
I ought to decide! [Prolonged applause and cheers.] 

That is just the case! The new Territories are the newly made 
bed to which our children are to go, and it lies with the nation to 
say whether they shall have snakes mixed up with them or not. 
It does not seem as if there could be much hesitation what our 
policy should be! [Applause.] 

Now I have spoken of a policy based on the idea that Slavery is 
wrong, and a policy based upon the idea that it is right. But an 
effort has been made for a policy that shall treat it as neither right 
or wrong. It is based upon utter indifference. Its leading advocate 
has said "I don't care whether it be voted up or down." 
[Laughter.] "It is merely a matter of dollars and cents." "The 
Almighty has drawn a line across this continent, on one side of 
which all soil must forever be cultivated by slave labor, and on the 
other by free;" "when the struggle is between the white man and 
the negro, I am for the white man; when it is between the ne- 
gro and the crocodile, I am for the negro." Its central idea is 
indifference. It holds that it makes no more difference to us 
whether the Territories become free or slave States, than whether 
my neighbor stocks his farm with horned cattle or puts it into to- 
bacco. All recognize this policy, the plausible sugar-coated name 
of which is "popular sovereignty' 9 [Laughter.] 

This policy chiefly stands in the way of a permanent settlement 
of the question. I believe there is no danger of its becoming the 
permanent policy of the country, for it is based on a public indif- 
ference. There is nobody that "don't care." ALL THE PEOPLE BO 

[18] 



MARCH 6, i860 

CARE! one way or the other. [Great applause.] I do not charge that 
its author, when he says he "don't care," states his individual opin- 
ion; he only expresses his policy for the government. I understand 
that he has never said, as an individual, whether he thought Slav- 
ery right or wrong and he is the only man in the nation that 
has not! Now such a policy may have a temporary run; it may 
spring up as necessary to the political prospects of some gentle- 
man; but it is utterly baseless; the people are not indifferent; and 
it can therefore have no durability or permanence. 

But suppose it could! Then it could be maintained only by a 
public opinion that shall say "we don't care." There must be a 
change in public opinion, the public mind must be so far de- 
bauched as to square with this policy of caring not at all. The 
people must come to consider this as "merely a question of dollars 
and cents," and to believe that in some places the Almighty has 
made Slavery necessarily eternal. This policy can be brought to 
prevail if the people can be brought round to say honestly "we 
don't care;" if not, it can never be maintained. It is for you to say 
whether that can be done. [Applause.] 

You are ready to say it cannot, but be not too fast! Remember 
what a long stride has been taken since the repeal of the Missouri 
Compromise! Do you know of any Democrat, of either branch of 
the party do you know one who declares that he believes that 
the Declaration of Independence has any application to the negro? 
Judge Taney declares that it has not, and Judge Douglas even 
vilifies me personally and scolds me roundly for saying that the 
Declaration applies to all men, and that negroes are men. 
[Cheers.] Is there a Democrat here who does not deny that the 
Declaration applies to a negro? Do any of you know of one? Well, 
I have tried before perhaps fifty audiences, some larger and some 
smaller than this, to find one such Democrat, and never yet have 
I found one who said I did not place him right in that. I must 
assume that Democrats hold that, and now, not one of these Demo- 
crats can show that he said that five years ago\ [Applause.] I ven- 
ture to defy the whole party to produce one man that ever uttered 
the belief that the Declaration did not apply to negroes, before the 
repeal of the Missouri Compromise! Four or five years ago we all 
thought negroes were men, and that when "all men" were named, 
negroes were included. But the whole Democratic party has de- 
liberately taken negroes from the class of men and put them in 
the class of brutes. [Applause.] Turn it as you will, it is simply the 
truth! Don't be too hasty then in saying that the people cannot 
be brought to this new doctrine, but note that long stride. One 

[19] 



MARCH 6, i860 

more as long completes the journey, from where negroes are es- 
timated as men to where they are estimated as mere brutes as 
rightful property! 

That saying, "in the struggle between the white man and the 
negro," &c., which I know came from the same source as this 
policy that saying marks another step. There is a falsehood 
wrapped up in that statement. "In the struggle between the white 
man and the negro" assumes that there is a struggle, in which 
either the white man must enslave the negro or the negro must 
enslave the white. There is no such struggle! It is merely an in- 
genious falsehood, to degrade and brutalize the negro. Let each let 
the other alone, and there is no struggle about it. If it was like two 
wrecked seamen on a narrow plank, when each must push the 
other off or drown himself, I would push the negro off or a white 
man either, but it is not; the plank is large enough for both. [Ap- 
plause.] This good earth is plenty broad enough for white man and 
negro both, and there is no need of either pushing the other off. 
[Continued applause.] 

So that saying, "in the struggle between the negro and the croco- 
dile," &c., is made up from the idea that down where the crocodile 
inhabits a -white man can't labor; it must be nothing else but croco- 
dile or negro; if the negro does not the crocodile must possess the 
earth; [laughter;] in that case he declares for the negro. The 
meaning of the whole is just this: As a white man is to a negro, 
so is a negro to a crocodile; and as the negro may rightfully treat 
the crocodile, so may the white man rightfully treat the nogro. 
This very dear phrase coined by its author, and so dear that he 
deliberately repeats it in many speeches, has a tendency to still 
further brutalize the negro, and to bring public opinion to the point 
of utter indifference whether men so brutalized are enslaved or 
not. When that time shall come, if ever, I think that policy to 
which I refer may prevail. But I hope the good freemen of this 
country will never allow it to come, and until then the policy can 
never be maintained. 

Now consider the effect of this policy. We in the States are not 
to care whether Freedom or Slavery gets the better, but the people 
in the Territories may care. They are to decide, and they may think 
what they please; it is a matter of dollars and cents! But are not 
the people of the Territories detailed from the States? If this feel- 
ing of indifference this absence of moral sense about the ques- 
tion prevails in the States, will it not be carried into the Terri- 
tories? Will not every man say, "I don't care, it is nothing to me?" 
If any one comes that wants Slavery, must they not say, "I don't 

[20] 



MARCH 6, i860 

care whether Freedom or Slavery be voted up or voted down?" It 
results at last in naturalizing [nationalizing?] 2 the institution of 
Slavery. Even if fairly carried out, that policy is just as certain to 
naturalize [nationalize] Slavery as the doctrine of Jeff Davis him- 
self. These are only two roads to the same goal, and "popular sov- 
ereignty" is just as sure and almost as short as the other. [Ap- 
plause.] 

What we want, and all we want, is to have with us the men 
who think slavery wrong. But those who say they hate slavery, 
and are opposed to it, but yet act with the Democratic party 
where are they? Let us apply a few tests. You say that you think 
slavery is wrong, but you denounce all attempts to restrain it. Is 
there anything else that you think wrong, that you are not will- 
ing to deal with as a wrong? Why are you so careful, so tender of 
this one wrong and no other? [Laughter.] You will not let us do a 
single thing as if it was wrong; there is no place where you will 
allow it to be even called wrong! We must not call it wrong in the 
Free States, because it is not there, and we must not call it wrong 
in the Slave States because it is there; we must not call it wrong 
in politics because that is bringing morality into politics, and we 
must not call it wrong in the pulpit because that is bringing poli- 
tics into religion; we must not bring it into the Tract Society or 
the other societies, because those are such unsuitable places, and 
there is no single place, according to you, where this wrong thing 
can properly be called wrong! [Continued laughter and applause.] 

Perhaps you will plead that if the people of Slave States should 
themselves set on foot an effort for emancipation, you would wish 
them success, and bid them God-speed. Let us test that! In 1858, 
the emancipation party of Missouri, with Frank Blair at their 
head, tried to get up a movement for that purpose, and having 
started a party contested the State. Blair was beaten, apparently 
if not truly, and when the news came to Connecticut, you, who 
knew that Frank Blair was taking hold of this thing by the right 
end, and doing the only thing that you say can properly be done 
to remove this wrong did you bow your heads in sorrow because 
of that defeat? Do you, any of you, know one single Democrat 
that showed sorrow over that result? Not one! On the contrary 
every man threw up his hat, and hallooed at the top of his lungs, 
"hooray for Democracy!" [Great laughter and applause.] 

Now, gentlemen, the Republicans desire to place this great ques- 
tion of slavery on the very basis on which our fathers placed it, 

2 Brackets not in the source. The Palladium text is possible, "but Lincoln prob- 
ably said "nationalizing." 

[21] 



MARCH 6, i860 

and no other. [Applause.] It is easy to demonstrate that "our 
Fathers, who framed this government under which we live," looked 
on Slavery as wrong, and so framed it and everything about it as 
to square with the idea that it was wrong, so far as the necessities 
arising from its existence permitted. In forming the Constitution 
they found the slave trade existing; capital invested in it; fields de- 
pending upon it for labor, and the whole system resting upon the 
importation of slave-labor. They therefore did not prohibit the 
slave trade at once, but they gave the power to prohibit it after 
twenty years. Why was this? What other foreign trade did they 
treat in that way? Would they have done this if they had not 
thought slavery wrong? 

Another thing was done by some of the same men who framed 
the Constitution, and afterwards adopted as their own act by the 
first Congress held under that Constitution, of which many of the 
framers were members; they prohibited the spread of Slavery into 
Territories. Thus the same men, the framers of the Constitution, 
cut off the supply and prohibited the spread of Slavery, and both 
acts show conclusively that they considered that the thing was 
wrong. 

If additional proof is wanting it can be found in the phraseology 
of the Constitution. When men are framing a supreme law and 
chart of government, to secure blessings and prosperity to untold 
generations yet to come, they use language as short and direct and 
plain as can be found, to express their meaning. In all matters but 
this of Slavery the framers of the Constitution used the very clear- 
est, shortest, and most direct language. But the Constitution alludes 
to Slavery three times without mentioning it once! The language 
used becomes ambiguous, roundabout, and mystical. They speak of 
the "immigration of persons," and mean the importation of slaves, 
but do not say so. In establishing a basis of representation they 
say "all other persons," when they mean to say slaves why did 
they not use the shortest phrase? In providing for the return of 
fugitives they say "persons held to service or labor." If they had 
said slaves it would have been plainer, and less liable to miscon- 
struction. Why didn't they do it. We cannot doubt that it was 
done on purpose. Only one reason is possible, and that is supplied 
us by one of the framers of the Constitution and it is not possible 
for man to conceive of any other they expected and desired that 
the system would come to an end, and meant that when it did, the 
Constitution should not show that there ever had been a slave in 
this good free country of ours! [Great applause.] 

I will dwell on that no longer. I see the signs of the approaching 

[22] 



MARCH 6, i860 

triumph of the Republicans in the bearing of their political adver- 
saries. A great deal of their war with us now-a-days is mere bush- 
whacking. [Laughter.] At the battle of Waterloo, when Napoleon's 
cavalry had charged again and again upon the unbroken squares 
of British infantry, at last they were giving up the attempt, and 
going off in disorder, when some of the officers in mere vexation 
and complete despair fired their pistols at those solid squares. The 
Democrats are in that sort of extreme desperation; it is nothing 
else. [Laughter.] I will take up a few of these arguments. 

There is "THE IRREPRESSIBLE CONFLICT." [Applause.] How they 
rail at Seward for that saying! They repeat it constantly; and al- 
though the proof has been thrust under their noses again and again, 
that almost every good man since the formation of our government 
has uttered that same sentiment, from Gen. Washington, who 
"trusted that we should yet have a confederacy of Free States," 
with Jefferson, Jay, Monroe, down to the latest days, yet they re- 
fuse to notice that at all, and persist in railing at Seward for saying 
it. Even Roger A. Pryor, editor of the Richmond Enquirer, uttered 
the same sentiment in almost the same language, and yet so little 
offence did it give the Democrats that he was sent for to Washing- 
ton to edit the States the Douglas organ there, while Douglas goes 
into hydrophobia and spasms of rage because Seward dared to 
repeat it. [Great applause.] This is what I call bushwhacking, a 
sort of argument that they must know any child can see through. 

Another is JOHN BROWN! [Great laughter.] You stir up insurrec- 
tions, you invade the South! John Brown! Harper's Ferry! Why, 
John Brown was not a Republican! You have never implicated a 
single Republican in that Harper's Ferry enterprise. We tell you 
that if any member of the Republican party is guilty in that mat- 
ter, you know it or you do not know it. If you do know it, you are 
inexcusable not to designate man and prove the fact. If you do 
not know it, you are inexcusable to assert it, and especially to per- 
sist in the assertion after you have tried and failed to make the 
proof. You need not be told that persisting in a charge which one 
does not know to be true is simply malicious slander. Some of you 
admit that no Republican designedly aided or encouraged the 
Harper's Ferry affair; but still insist that our doctrines and dec- 
larations necessarily lead to such results. We do not believe it. We 
know we hold to no doctrines, and make no declarations, which 
were not held to and made by our fathers who framed the Gov- 
ernment under which we live, and we cannot see how declarations 
that were patriotic when they made them are villainous when 
we make them. You never dealt fairly by us in relation to that 

[23] 



MARCH 6, i860 

affair and I will say frankly that I know of nothing in your char- 
acter that should lead us to suppose that you would. You had just 
been soundly thrashed in elections in several States, and others 
were soon to come. You rejoiced at the occasion, and only were 
troubled that there were not three times as many killed in the af- 
fair. You were in evident glee there was no sorrow for the killed 
nor for the peace of Virginia disturbed you were rejoicing that 
by charging Republicans with this thing you might get an ad- 
vantage of us in New York, and the other States. You pulled that 
string as tightly as you could, but your very generous and worthy 
expectations were not quite fulfilled. [Laughter.] Each Republican 
knew that the charge was a slander as to himself at least, and 
was not inclined by it to cast his vote in your favor. It was mere 
bushwhacking, because you had nothing else to do. You are still 
on that track, and I say, go on! If you think you can slander a 
woman into loving you or a man into voting for you, try it till you 
are satisfied! [Tremendous applause.] 

Another specimen of this bushwhacking, that "shoe strike." 
[Laughter.] Now be it understood that I do not pretend to know 
all about the matter. I am merely going to speculate a little about 
some of its phases. And at the outset, / am glad to see that a system 
of labor prevails in Neu? England under uthich laborers CATST strike 
when they want to [Cheers,] where they are not obliged to work 
under all circumstances, and are not tied down and obliged to labor 
whether you pay them or not! [Cheers.] I like the system which 
lets a man quit when he wants to, and wish it might prevail every- 
where. [Tremendous applause.] One of the reasons why I am op- 
posed to Slavery is just here. What is the true condition of the 
laborer? I take it that it is best for all to leave each man free to 
acquire property as fast as he can. Some will get wealthy, I don't 
believe in a law to prevent a man from getting rich; it would do 
more harm than good. So while we do not propose any war upon 
capital, we do wish to allow the humblest man an equal chance to 
get rich with everybody else. [Applause.] When one starts poor, 
as most do in the race of life, free society is such that he knows he 
can better his condition; he knows that there is no fixed condition 
of labor, for his whole life. I ana not ashamed to confess that 
twenty five years ago I was a hired laborer, mauling rails, at work 
on a flat-boat just what might happen to any poor man's son! 
[Applause.] I want every man to have the chance and I believe 
a black man is entitled to it in which he can better his condition 
when he may look forward and hope to be a hired laborer this 
year and the next, work for himself afterward, and finally to hire 

[24] 



MARCH 6, i860 

men to work for him! That is the true system. Up here in New 
England, you have a soil that scarcely sprouts black-eyed beans, 
and yet where will you find wealthy men so wealthy, and poverty 
so rarely in extremity? There is not another such place on earth! 
[Cheers.] I desire that if you get too thick here, and find it hard 
to better your condition on this soil, you may have a chance to 
strike and go somewhere else, where you may not be degraded, nor 
have your family corrupted by forced rivalry with negro slaves. 
I want you to have a clean bed, and no snakes in it! [Cheers.] 
Then you can better your condition, and so it may go on and on 
in one ceaseless round so long as man exists on the face of the 
earth! [Prolonged applause.] 

Now, to come back to this shoe strike, if, as the Senator from 
Illinois asserts, this is caused by withdrawal of Southern votes, 
consider briefly how you will meet the difficulty. You have done 
nothing, and have protested that you have done nothing, to injure 
the South. And yet, to get back the shoe trade, you must leave off 
doing something that you are now doing. What is it? You must stop 
thinking slavery wrong! Let your institutions be -wholly changed; 
let your State Constitutions be subverted, glorify slavery, and so 
you will get back the shoe trade for what? You have brought 
owned labor with it to compete with your own labor, to under- 
work you, and to degrade you! Are you ready to get back the trade 
Dn those terms? 

But the statement is not correct. You have not lost that trade; 
orders were never better than now! Senator Mason, a Democrat, 
xxmes into the Senate in homespun, a proof that the dissolution 
>f the Union has acttially begun! but orders are the same. Your fac- 
tories have not struck work, neither those where they make any- 
Jhing for coats, nor for pants, nor for shirts, nor for ladies' dresses. 
Vtr. Mason has not reached the manufacturers who ought to have 
nade him a coat and pants! To make his proof good for anything 
le should have come into the Senate barefoot! (Great laughter.) 

Another bushwha eking contrivance; simply that, nothing else! 

find a good many people "who are very much concerned about 
he loss of Southern trade. Now either these people are sincere or 
hey are not. (Laughter.) I will speculate a little about that. If 
hey are sincere, and are moved by any real danger of the loss of 
Southern trade, they will simply get their names on the white list, 3 

3 Lincoln refers to a movement on the part of certain business interests to take 
dvantage of the Southern boycott of New England manufactures by preparing 

list of "white" (Democrat) rather than "black" (Republican) manufacturing 
oncerns for the guidance of Southern purchasers. 

[25] 



MARCH 6, i860 

and then, instead of persuading Republicans to do likewise, they 
will be glad to keep you away! Don't you see they thus shut off 
competition? They would not be whispering around to Republicans 
to come in and share the profits with them. But if they are not 
sincere, and are merely trying to fool Republicans out of their 
votes, they will grow very anxious about your pecuniary pros- 
pects; they are afraid you are going to get broken up and ruined; 
they did not care about Democratic votes Oh no, no y no! You 
must judge which class those belong to whom you meet; I leave it 
to you to determine from the facts. 

Let us notice some more of the stale charges against Repub- 
licans. You say we are sectional. We deny it. That makes an issue; 
and the burden of proof is upon you. You produce your proof; and 
what is it? Why, that our party has no existence in your section 
gets no votes in your section. The fact is substantially true; but 
does it prove the issue? If it does, then in case we should, without 
change of principle, begin to get votes in your section, we should 
thereby cease to be sectional. You cannot escape this conclusion; 
and yet, are you willing to abide by it? If you are, you will prob- 
ably soon find that we have ceased to be sectional, for we shall get 
votes in your section this very year. [Applause.] The fact that we 
get no votes in your section is a fact of your making, and not of 
ours. And if there be fault in that fact, that fault is primarily 
yours, and remains so until you show that we repel you by some 
wrong principle or practice. If we do repel you by any wrong 
principle or practice, the fault is ours ; but this brings you to where 
you ought to have started to a discussion of the right or wrong of 
our principle. If our principle, put in practice, would wrong your 
section for the benefit of ours, or for any other object, then our 
principle, and we with it, are sectional, and are justly opposed and 
denounced as such. Meet us, then, on the question of whether our 
principle, put in practice, would wrong your section; and so meet 
it as if it were possible that something may be said on our side. 
Do you accept the challenge? No? Then you really believe that the 
principle which our fathers who framed the Government under 
which we live thought so clearly right as to adopt it, and indorse it 
again and again, upon their official oaths, is, in fact, so clearly 
wrong as to demand your condemnation without a moment's con- 
sideration. 

Some of you delight to flaunt in our faces the warning against 
sectional parties given by Washington in his Farewell address. 
Less than eight years before Washington gave that warning, he 
had, as President of the United States, approved and signed an 

[26] 



MARCH 6, i860 

act of Congress, enforcing the prohibition of Slavery in the north- 
western Territory, which act embodied the policy of Government 
upon that subject, up to and at the very moment he penned that 
warning; and about one year after he penned it he wrote LaFayette 
that he considered that prohibition a wise measure, expressing in 
the same connection his hope that we should some time have a 
confederacy of Free States. 

Bearing this in mind, and seeing that sectionalism has since 
arisen upon this same subject, is that warning a weapon in your 
hands against us, or in our hands against you? Could Washington 
himself speak, would he cast the blame of that sectionalism upon 
us, who sustain his policy, or upon you who repudiate it? "We re- 
spect that warning of Washington, and we commend it to you, to- 
gether with his example pointing to the right application of it. 
[Applause.] 

But you say you are conservative eminently conservative 
while we are revolutionary, destructive, or something of the sort. 
What is conservatism? Is it not adherence to the old and tried, 
against the new and untried? We stick to, contend for, the iden- 
tical old policy on the point in controversy which was adopted by 
our fathers who framed the Government under which we live; 
while you with one accord reject, and scout, and spit upon that old 
policy, and insist upon substituting something new. True, you dis- 
agree among yourselves as to what that substitute shall be. You 
have consider able ^variety of new propositions and plans, but you 
are unanimous in rejecting and denouncing the old policy of the 
fathers. Some of you are for reviving the foreign slave-trade; some 
for a Congressional Slave-Code for the Territories; some for Con- 
gress forbidding the Territories to prohibit Slavery within their 
limits; some for maintaining Slavery in the Territories through 
the Judiciary; some for the "gur-reat pur-rin-ciple" that "if one 
man would enslave another, no third man should object/' fan- 
tastically called "Popular Sovereignty;" [great laughter,] but 
never a man among you in favor of Federal prohibition of Slavery 
in Federal Territories, according to the practice of our fathers who 
framed the Government under which we live. Not one of all your 
various plans can show a precedent or an advocate in the century 
within which our Government originated. And yet you draw your- 
selves up and say "We are eminently conservative!" [Great 
laughter.] 

It is exceedingly desirable that all parts of this great Confeder- 
acy shall be at peace, and in harmony, one with another. Let us 
Republicans do our part to have it so. Even though much pro- 

[27] 



MARCH 6, i860 

voked, let us do nothing through passion and ill temper. Even 
though the Southern people will not so much as listen to us, let us 
calmly consider their demands, and yield to them if, in our delib- 
erate view of our duty, we possibly can. Judging by all they say 
and do, and by the subject and nature of their controversy with 
us, let us determine, if we can, what will satisfy them? 

Will they be satisfied if the Territories be unconditionally sur- 
rendered to them? We know they will not. In all their present 
complaints against us, the Territories are scarcely mentioned. In- 
vasions and insurrections are the rage now. Will it satisfy them if, 
in the future, we have nothing to do with invasions and insurrec- 
tions? We know it will not. We so know because we know we 
never had anything to do with invasions and insurrections; 
and yet this total abstaining does not exempt us from the charge 
and the denunciation. 

The question recurs, what will satisfy them? Simply this: we 
must not only let them alone, but we must, somehow, convince 
them that we do let them alone. [Applause.] This, we know by 
experience, is no easy task. We have been so trying to convince 
them, from the very beginning of our organization, but with no 
success. In all our platforms and speeches, we have constantly 
protested our purpose to let them alone; but this has had no tend- 
ency to convince them. Alike unavailing to convince them is the 
fact that they have never detected a man of us in any attempt to 
disturb them. 

These natural and apparently adequate means all failing, what 
will convince them? This, and this only; cease to call slavery 
wrong, and join them in calling it right. And this must be done 
thoroughly done in acts as well as in ivords. Silence will not be 
tolerated we must place ourselves avowedly with them. Douglas's 
new sedition law must be enacted and enforced, suppressing all 
declarations that Slavery is wrong, whether made in politics, in 
presses, in pulpits, or in private. We must arrest and return their 
fugitive slaves with greedy pleasure. We must pull down our Free 
State Constitutions. The whole atmosphere must be disinfected of 
all taint of opposition to Slavery, before they will cease to believe 
that all their troubles proceed from us. So long as we call Slavery 
wrong, whenever a slave runs away they will overlook the obvi- 
ous fact that he ran because he was oppressed, and declare he was 
stolen off. Whenever a master cuts his slaves with the lash, and 
they cry out under it, he will overlook the obvious fact that the 
negroes cry out because they are hurt, and insist that they were 
put up to it by some rascally abolitionist. [Great laughter.] 

[28] 



MARCH 6, i860 

I am quite aware that they do not state their case precisely in 
this way. Most of them would probably say to us, "Let us alone, 
do nothing to us, and say what you please about Slavery." But 
we do let them alone have never disturbed them so that, after 
all, it is what we say, which dissatisfies them. They will continue 
to accuse us of doing, until we cease saying. 

I am also aware they have not, as yet, in terms, demanded the 
overthrow of our Free State Constitutions. Yet those Constitutions 
declare the wrong of Slavery, with more solemn emphasis than do 
all other sayings against it; and when all these other sayings shall 
have been silenced, the overthrow of these Constitutions will be 
demanded, and nothing be left to resist the demand. It is nothing to 
the contrary, that they do not demand the whole of this just now. 
Demanding what they do, and for the reason they do, they can 
voluntarily stop nowhere short of this consummation. Holding as 
they do, that Slavery is morally right, and socially elevating, they 
cannot cease to demand a full national recognition of it, as a legal 
right, and a social blessing. 

Nor can we justifiably withhold this, on any ground save our 
conviction that Slavery is wrong. If Slavery is right, all words, 
acts, laws, and Constitutions against it, are themselves wrong, and 
should be silenced, and swept away. If it is right, we cannot justly 
object to its nationality its universality; if it is wrong, they can- 
not justly insist upon its extension its enlargement. All they 
ask, we could readily grant, if we thought Slavery right; all we 
ask, they could as readily grant, if they thought it -wrong. Then- 
thinking it right, and our thinking it wrong, is the precise fact up- 
on which depends the whole controversy. Thinking it right as they 
do, they are not to blame for desiring its full recognition, as being 
right; but, thinking it wrong, as we do, can we yield to them? Can 
we cast our votes with their view, and against our own? In view of 
our moral, social, and political responsibilities, can we do this? 

"Wrong as we think Slavery is, we can yet afford to let it alone 
where it is, because that much is due to the necessity arising from 
its actual presence in the nation; but can we, while our votes will 
prevent it, allow it to spread into the National Territories, and to 
overrun us here in these Free States? 

If our sense of duty forbids this, then let us stand by our duty, 
fearlessly and effectively. Let us be diverted by none of those 
sophistical contrivances wherewith we are so industriously plied 
and belabored contrivances such as groping for some middle 
ground between the right and the wrong, vain as the search for a 
man who should be neither a living man nor a dead man such as 

[29] 



MARCH 1 4t> i860 
a policy of "don't care" on a question about which all true men do 

car e such as Union appeals beseeching true Union men to yield 

to Disunionists, reversing the divine rule, and calling, not the sin- 
ners, but the righteous to repentance such as invocations of 
Washington, imploring men to unsay what Washington did. 

Neither let us be slandered from our duty by false accusations 
against us, nor frightened from it by menaces of destruction to 
the Government, nor of dungeons to ourselves. Let us have faith 
that right makes might; and in that faith, let us, to the end, dare to 
do our duty, as we understand it. 



To William A. Beers and Sereno Mansfield 1 

Messrs. Beers & Mansfield Springfield, Ills. March 14, 1860 

Gentlemen Your request to take a Photographic likeness of me, 
while in your City, was duly received; but at a time when my ar- 
rangements were so made that I could not call upon you before 
leaving. I would have written sooner, but the matter passed out 
of my mind; and is now recalled by the sight of your note. I beg 
you will believe me guilty of no intentional disrespect. Very Re- 
spectfully A. LmcoLisr 

1 ALS, OClWHi. Beers and Mansfield were photographers at New Haven, 
Connecticut. 



To A. Chester 1 

A. Chester, Esq Springfield Ills. 

Dear Sir: March 14, 1860 

Your very kind and flattering letter, inclosing an invitation to 
the Connecticut editors to accept the hospitalities of those giving 
the invitation, while attending the Chicago convention, was re- 
ceived by me at New-Haven. I was the guest of an editor at the 
time Mr. Jas. F. Babcock 2 and to whom I delivered to [the?! 
document, perceiving no better way to dispose of it. I suppose it 
was published at once Yours truly A. 



1 ALS, ICHi. The identity of A. Chester is somewhat obscure. The inference is 
that he was a newspaper man at Chicago, but Chicago directories list only "Au- 
gustine Chester" as a lawyer in 1858, "Augustus Chester" (at the same address) 
in 1860, and again the same as "Augustin Chester" in 1862. An "A. Chester" 
edited the Kankakee Gazette (1853-1856), but that he was Lincoln's correspond- 
ent has not been verified. 

2 James R Babcock was editor of the New Haven Palladium. 

[30] 



To Alexander W. Harvey 1 

Alexr. W. Harvey, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

Dear Sir March 14, 1860 

Your despach of the 27th. ult. to Mr. Greely, asking if you 
could not have a speech from me on my return, "was f orwarded to 
me by Mr. G. reaching me at Exeter N.H. 

The appointments I had then already made carried me so far 
beyond my allotted time that I could not consistently add another. 

I hope I may yet be allowed to meet the good people of Buffalo 
before the close of the struggle in which we are engaged. Yours 
Respectfully A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, RPB. Alexander W. Harvey was an attorney at Buffalo, New York. 

To Rufus W. Miles 1 

Rufus W. Miles, Esq Springfield, 

My dear Sir: March 15- 1860 

Reaching home yesterday from the East, I found your letter 
urging the necessity of my making a speech of a particular sort; 
and while I was considering it, your second note came in the morn- 
ing, telling me I had already made the speech you were wanting, 
and thus relieving me considerably. 

Thanking you for your kind feelings towards me, and your good 
opinion of my late speech, allow me to subscribe myself. Yours 
very truly A. 



1 ALS, owned by Joseph W. Miles, Gilson, Illinois. Rufus W. Miles was repre- 
sentative from Knox County in the Illinois House of Representatives 

To Mark W. Delahay 1 

Dear Delahay Springfield, IllsMar 16, 1860 

I have just returned from the East. Before leaving, I received 
your letter of Feb. 6; and on my return I find those of the i/th. & 
igth. with GenL Lane's 2 note inclosed in one of them. 

I sincerely wish you could be elected one of the first Senators 
for Kansas; but how to help you I do not know. If it were per- 
tnissable for me to interfere, I am not personally acquainted with 
i single member of your Legislature. If my known friendship for 
pxm could be of any advantage, that friendship was abundantly 
xianifested by me last December while in Kansas. If any member 
aad written me, as you say some have Trumbull, I would very 
eadily answer him. I shall write Trumbull on the subject at this 
dtting. 

[31] 



MARCH l6, i860 

I understood, while in Kansas, that the State Legislature will 
not meet until the State is admitted. Was that the right under- 
standing? 

As to your kind wishes for myself, allow me to say I can not 
enter the ring on the money basis first, because, in the main, it 
is wrong; and secondly, I have not, and can not get, the money. I 
say, in the main, the use of money is wrong; but for certain ob- 
jects, in a political contest, the use of some, is both right, and in- 
dispensable. With me, as with yourself, this long struggle has been 
one of great pecuniary loss. I now distinctly say this. If you shall 
be appointed a delegate to Chicago, I will furnish one hundred dol- 
lars to bear the expences of the trip. 3 

Present my respects to Genl. Lane; and say to him, I shall be 
pleased to hear from him at any time. Your friend, as ever 

A. LINCOLN 

ES. I have not yet taken the newspaper slip to the Journal. I 
shall do that to-morrow; and then send you the paper as requested. 

A. L. 

i ALS, DLC-HW. 2 James H. Lane 

3 See Lincoln to Delahay, April 14, infra 

To Lyman TrumbulP 

Hon: L. Trumbull Springfield, Mar- 16, 1860 

My dear Sir: When I first saw by the despaches that Doug- 
las had run from the Senate while you were speaking I did not 
quite understand it; but seeing by the report that you were cram- 
ming down his throat that infernal stereotyped lye of his about 
"negro equality" the thing became plain. 

Another matter. Our friend Delahay wants to be one of the 
Senators from Kansas. Certainly it is not for outsiders to obtrude 
their interference. Delahay has suffered a great deal in our cause, 
and been very faithful to it, as I understand. He writes me that 
some of the members of the Kansas Legislature have written you 
in a way that your simple answer might help him. I wish you 
would consider whether you can not assist him that far, without 
impropriety. I know it is a delicate matter; and I do not wish to 
press you beyond your own judgment. 2 Yours as ever 

A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, CSmH. 

2 Trumbull replied, March 26, that he would Ibe glad to help "our friend Dela- 
hay, if I knew how to do it. . . ." but that the Kansans who had written him 
had not inquired about Delahay and that he could write something in his behalf 
only if they asked (DLC-RTL) . 

[32] 



To James W. Somers 1 

fames W. Somers, Esq Springfield, 

V[y dear Sir: March 17, 1860 

Reaching home from the East three days ago, I found your let- 
er of Feb. 2 6th. 

Considering your difficulty of hearing I think you would better 
;ettle in Chicago, if as you say, a good many already in fair prac- 
ice there will take you into partnership. If you had not that diffi- 
culty I still should think it an even ballance whether you would 
lot better remain in Chicago, with such a chance for a co-partner- 
hip. 

If I went West, I think I would go to Kansas to Leavenworth, 
r Atchison. Both these are, and will continue to be fine growing 
>laces. 

I believe I have said all I can, and I have said it with the deep- 
st interest for your welf are Yours truly A. 



1 ALS-F, Henry C. Whitney, Life on the Circuit ivith Lincoln, 1892, p. 266. 
omers wrote that he wanted to leave Urbana, and asked Lincoln's advice as 
:> going into partnership with Henry C. Whitney in Chicago, or going to 
Missouri or Kansas (DLC-RTL) . See also Lincoln's letter of recommendation, 
/larch 28, infra. 

To E. Stafford 1 

Springfield, Illinois, March 17, 1860. 

Dear Sir: Reaching home on the 4th instant, I found yours of 
he ist. Thanking you very sincerely for your kind purposes to- 
ward me, I am compelled to say the money part of the arrange- 
ment you propose is, with me, an impossibility. I could not raise 
en thousand dollars if it would save me from the fate of John 
Jrown. Nor have my friends, so far as I know, yet reached the 
ioint of staking any money on my chances of success. I "wish I 
ould tell you better things, but it is even so. Yours very truly, 

A. 



l NH, VI, 7. There are no letters from E. Stafford in the Lincoln Papers, and 
Eforts to identify him have been unsuccessful. 

To Samuel Galloway 1 

Ion. Samuel Galloway Chicago, March 24 1860 

My dear Sir: I am here attending a trial in court. Before leav- 
ig home I received your kind letter of the 5th. Of course I am 
ratified to know I have friends in Ohio who are disposed to give 

[33] 



MARCH 26, i860 

me the highest evidence of their friendship and confidence. Mr 
Parrott 2 of the Legislature, had written me to the same effect. If 
I have any chance, it consists mainly in the fact that the whole 
opposition would vote for me if nominated. (I dont mean to in- 
clude the pro-slavery opposition of the South, of course.) My name 
is new in the field; and I suppose I am not the first choice of a 
very great many. Our policy, then, is to give no offence to others 
leave them in a mood to come to us, if they shall be compelled 
to give up their first love. This, too, is dealing justly with all, and 
leaving us in a mood to support heartily whoever shall be nomi- 
nated. I believe I have once before told you that I especially wish 
to do no ungenerous thing towards Governor Chase, because he 
gave us his sympathy in 1858, when scarcely any other distin- 
guished man did. Whatever you may do for me, consistently with 
these suggestions, will be appreciated, and gratefully remembered. 
Please write me again. Yours very truly A. LHNTCOLIST 

1 Copy, DLC-R.TL. The copy is in Nicolay's handwriting and bears his cer- 
tification as being- "From the original, in the possession of Dr. Guy Coulter, 
Columbus Ohio." The original is presumably extant but has not been located 

2 Edwin A. Parrott, representative in the Ohio legislature from Montgomery 
County, who had met Lincoln at Dayton in September, 1859. 



To Lyman Trumbull 1 

Hon: L. Trumbull Chicago, March 26. 1860 

My dear Sir: They are having a desperate struggle in Connecti- 
cut; and it would both please, and help our friends there, if you 
could be with them in the last days of the fight. Having been there, 
I know they are proud of you as a son of their own soil, and would 
be moved to greater exertion by your presence among them. Can 
you not go? Telegraph them, and go right along. The fiendish at- 
tempt now being made upon Connecticut, must not be allowed to 
succeed. Yours as ever A. 

i ALS, CSroH. 



To Ward EL Lamon 1 

Hon: W. H. Lamon. Chicago, March 28- 1860 

My dear Sir: Yours about motion to quash an indictment, was 
received yesterday. I think I had no authority but the Statute 
when I wrote the Indictment. In fact, I remember but little about 
it. I think yet there is no necessity for setting out the letter in 

[34] 



APRIL 1, i860 

haec verba. Our Statute, as I think, relaxes the high degree of 
technical certainty formerly required. 

I am so busy with our case on trial here, 2 that I can not examine 
authorities near as fully as you can there. 

If, after all, the indictment shall be quashed, it will only prove 
that ray forte is as a Statesman, rather than as a Prossecutor. 
Yours as ever A. 



1 ALS, CSmH. As prosecuting attorney, Lamon wrote from Lincoln, Illinois, 
on March 26, about Lincoln's motion to quash the indictment against his client 
for sending a threatening letter. On Lincoln's suggestion the indictment had not 
included the letter. The motion declared that, the letter was not set out in the 
indictment, and Lamon wished Lincoln to investigate authorities and find reason 
to sustain the indictment, since "Quashing an Indct. written by a prominent can- 
didate for the Presidency of the U.S. by a little court like Col. [David] Davis' 
will not sound well in history." Names of litigants are not given, and no other 
references to the case have been found (DLC-RTL). 

2 Johnston v. Jones and Marsh, the famous "Sandbar Case." See Lincoln to 
Robert A. Kinzie, January 5, 1858, supra. 



Recommendation for James W. Somers 1 

Whom it may concern Chicago. March 28. 1860 

My young friend James W. Somers, the bearer of this, I have 
known from boyhood, and I can truly say that in my opinion he is 
entirely faithful, and fully competent to the performance 2 of any 
business he will undertake. A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS-F, Whitney, The Lincoln Autographic Album [0.1891], p. 44 See 
letter to Somers, March 17, supra. 

2 "Discharge" deleted and "performance" inserted by Lincoln. 



Endorsement on an Express Company Envelope 1 

[April i, 1860] 

This brought me Fifteen dollars, without any intimation as to 
whom it came from. It probably came from Mr. Patterson to whom 
I loaned that amount a few weeks ago. 



1 AES, DLC-RTL. This endorsement is written on an envelope of the United 
States Express Company, sent from Homer, Illinois. The date April i, 1860, is 
not in Lincoln's hand, but may be that of the agent. The date September 25, 
1858, given to this endorsement by Helen Nicolay (Personal Traits of Abra- 
ham Lincoln, p. no) and followed by Angle (New Letters and Papers of 
Abraham Lincoln., p. 196) is obviously an error of transposition the date be- 
longing with the preceding item concerning Henry Chew. "Mr. Patterson" was 
probably one of two brothers, William and Golden Patterson of Champaign 
County, Illinois. In April, 1859, Lincoln had defended a third brother, Thomas 
Patterson, in a murder trial. See Lincoln's endorsement, August 14, infra. 

[35] 



To Richard M. Corwine 1 

Hon. R. M. Corwine. Springfield, 111., April 6th. 1860. 

My Dear Sir Reaching home yesterday after an absence of 
more than two weeks, I found your letter of the 241*1 of March. 
Remembering that when not a very great man begins to be men- 
tioned for a very great position, his head is very likely to be a little 
turned, I concluded I am not the fittest person to answer the ques- 
tions you ask. Making due allowance for this, I think Mr. Seward 
is the very best candidate we could have for the North of Illinois, 
and the very worst for the South of it. The estimate of Gov. Chase 
here is neither better nor worse than that of Seward, except that 
he is a newer man. They are regarded as being almost the same, 
seniority giving Seward the inside track. Mr. Bates, I think, would 
be the best man for the South of our State, and the worst for the 
North of it. If Judge McLean was fifteen, or even ten years 
younger, I think he would be stronger than either, in our state, 
taken as a whole; but his great age, and the recollection of the 
deaths of Harrison and Taylor have, so far, prevented his being 
much spoken of here. 

I really believe we can carry the state for either of them, or for 
any one who may be nominated; but doubtless it would be easier 
to do it with some than with others. 

I feel myself disqualified to speak of myself in this matter. I 
feel this letter will be of little value to you; but I can make it no 
better, imder the circumstances. Let it be strictly confidential, not 
that there is any thing really objectionable in it, but because it 
might be misconstrued. Yours very truly, A. 



1 Tracy, pp. 138-39. Richard M. Corwine, a lawyer at Cincinnati, wrote 
that the delegates from Ohio were divided on Chase, Bates, Seward, and Mc- 
Lean, and asked whether Illinois would support McLean, Bates or Seward. He 
added, "I am pretty sure we could unite more votes on you than on Seward" 
(DLC-RTL). 

To William Gooding 1 

Wm. Gooding, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: April 6, 1860 

Reaching home yesterday, I found your very kind and compli- 
mentary letter of March aist.; and for which, I sincerely thank 
you. Our down East friends did, indeed, treat me with great kind- 
ness, demonstrating what I before believed, that all good, inteli- 
gent people are very much alike. Yours very truly 

A. LINCOXJNT 
[36] 



APRIL 6 9 i860 

1 ALS-P, ISLA. William Gooding was an old acquaintance at Lockport, Ill- 
inois, who had been chief engineer for the construction of the Illinois-Michigan 
Canal, and in 1860 was still connected with the canal as secretary. 



To William C. Hobbs and William H. Hanna 1 

Dr. W. C. Hobbs, & Springfield, 

W. H. Hanna, Esq April 6, 1860 

Gentlemen Your despach, requesting me to deliver a speech 
at Bloomington is received. I very much prefer to make no more 
speeches soon; but if, as friends of mine, you can not excuse me, it 
is not much odds when say, the evening of Tuesday the loth. 
Inst. Yours as ever A. 



1 ALS, ICU. William C. Hobbs was a schoolteacher and county clerk at 
Bloomington, Illinois. 



To Richard V. B. Lincoln 1 

Richd. V. B. Lincoln, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir April 6. 1860 

Owing to absence from home, yours of March igth. was not re- 
ceived till yesterday. You are a little mistaken. My grand-father 
did not go from Berks Co. Pa; but, as I learn, his ancesters did, 
some time before his birth. He was born in. Rockingham Co Va; 
went from there to Kentucky, and there was killed by Indians 
about 1 784. That the family originally came from Berks, I learned 
a dozen years ago, by letter, from one of them, then residing at 
Sparta, Rockingham Co. Va. His name was David Lincoln. 2 I re- 
in [em] ber, long ago, seeing Austin Lincoln, & Davis Lincoln, said 
to be sons of Hannaniah, or Annaniah Lincoln, who was said to 
have been a cousin of my grand-father. 3 I have no doubt you and 
I are distantly related. I should think from what you say, that you 
and my father were second cousins. 

I shall be glad to hear from you at any time. Yours very truly 

A. LiisrcorjNr 

1ALS-F, Ervin S. Chapman, Latest Light on Abraham Lincoln and War- 
Time Memories [0.1917], p. 510. Richard V. B. Lincoln was a farmer and 
county commissioner at Laurelton, Pennsylvania. His letter of March 19 is not 
in the Lincoln Papers. 2 Vide supra., March 24, 1848. 

3 Hannaniah Lincoln's sons Austin and Davis migrated from Kentucky to 
Perry County and Spencer County, Indiana, probably a year or two before 
Abraham's father took his family to Spencer County. 

[37] 



To Cornelius F, McNeill 1 

C. F. McNeill, Esq.- Springfield, April 6, 1860. 

Dear Sir: Reaching home yesterday, I found yours of the 23d. 
March, inclosing a slip from The Middleport Press. It is not true 
that I ever charged anything for a political speech in my life but 
this much is true: Last October I was requested, by letter, to de- 
liver some sort of speech in Mr. Beechers 2 church, in Brooklyn, 
$200 being offered in the first letter. I wrote that I could do it in 
February, provided they would take a political speech, if I could 
find time to get up no other. They agreed, and subsequently I in- 
formed them the speech would have to be a political one. When I 
reached New York, I, for the first [time], learned that the place 
was changed to "Cooper Institute." I made the speech, and left for 
New Hampshire, where I have a son at school, neither asking for 
pay nor having any offered me. Three days after, a check for 
$200- was sent to me, at N.H., and I took it, and did not knout it 
was wrong. My understanding now is, though I knew nothing of it 
at the time, that they did charge for admittance, at the Cooper In- 
stitute, and that they took in more than twice $200. 

I have made this explanation to you as a friend; but I wish no 
explanation made to our enemies. What they want is a squabble 
and a fuss; and that they can have if we explain; and they can not 
have if we don't. 

When I returned through New York from New England I was 
told by the gentlemen who sent me the check, that a drunken vaga- 
bond in the Club, having learned something about the $200, made 
the exhibition out of which The Herald manufactured the article 
quoted by The Press of your town. 

My judgment is, and therefore my request is, that you give no 
denial, and no explanations. 

Thanking you for your kind interest in the matter, I remain, 
Yours truly, A. 



CSmH-Lamon Papers; copy (incomplete), DLC-HW. Cornelius F. 
McNeill was editor of the Middleport Press and an attorney at Middleport, 
Iroquois County, Illinois a town no longer in existence, having become a part 
of Watseka, Illinois. 2 Henry W. Beecher. 

To John Pickering 1 

John Pickering, Esq. Springfield, Ills., April 6, 1860. 

My Dear Sir: Reaching home yesterday after an absence of two 
weeks, I foiond your letter of March 24th. Pamphlet copies of my 
late speech at Cooper Institute, N.Y., can be had at the office of the 

[38] 



APRIL 7, i860 

N.Y. Tribune; at the Republican Club Room at Washington, and 
at the office of the Illinois Journal at this place. At which place 
they are cheapest, I do not certainly know. 

I have no difficulty in knowing who you are, by the fact that I 
knew your father so very well. I shall be glad to hear from you at 
any time. Yours truly, A. 



l Printed in Walter Colyer, "Times When Lincoln Remembered Albion," 
Journal of the Illinois State Historical Society - 9 IX (January, 1917), 494-95. 
John Pickering was the son of William Pickering, Whig state representative 
from Edwards County (842-1852). 

To John M. Carson 1 

John M. Carson, Esq., 

Chairman of the Committee of Lectures Springfield, 

Of the Harrison Literary Institute. April 7, 1860 

Dear Sir: Yours of March 14 addressed to me at Chicago seek- 
ing to arrange with me to lecture for the Harrison Literary Insti- 
tute has been received. I regret that I cannot make such an ar- 
rangement. I am not a professional lecturer. Have never got up but 
one lecture, and that I think rather a poor one. Besides, what time 
I can spare from my own business this season I shall be compelled 
to give to politics. Respectfully yours, A. LnNrcoosr. 

1 Tracy, p. 141. The Harrison Literary Institute was at Philadelphia. See 
also the almost identical letter to F. C. Herbruger, infra. The fact that there is 
no letter of invitation from Carson in the Lincoln Papers is strange, especially 
since Herbruger's letter is preserved. The original letter to Carson has not 
been located, and in view of the almost identical text in Tracy, the editors have 
wondered whether the letter to Carson actually exists. A letter from Carson, 
July 19, 1860 (DLC-RTL), in which he introduces himself, as if for the first 
time, and offers to deliver 150 or 200* votes which he claims to control, in con- 
sideration of his appointment to a job in the postoffice or customs, is so written 
as to suggest that he had never before written to or received a letter from 
Lincoln. 

To Harvey G. Eastman 1 

H. G. Eastman, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

Dear Sir April 7. 1860 

Yours of March i8th. addressed to me at Chicago, and request- 
ing my photograph is received. I have not a single one now at my 
control; but I think you can easily get one at New- York. While I 
was there I was taken to one of the places where they get up such 
things, and I suppose they got my shaddow, and can multiply 
copies indefinitely. 2 Any of the Republican Club men there can 
show you the place. Yours truly A. LiisrcoxjNr 

[39] 



APRIL 7, i860 

1 ALS owned by Miss Mary Bowditch Forbes, Milton, Massachusetts. Har- 
vey G. Eastman was an abolitionist operating a business college at Poughkeep- 
sie, New York. 

2 The photographs made by Mathew Brady, February 27, 1860. 



To F. C. Herbruger 1 

F. C. Herbruger, Secy &c Springfield, Ills. 

Dear Sir April 7. 1860 

Yours of March 14th. addressed to me at Chicago, and seeking 
to arrange with me to Lecture for the Harrison Literary Institute, 
has been received. I regret to say I can not make such arrange- 
ment. I am not a professional lecturer have never got up but one 
lecture; and that, I think, rather a poor one. Besides, what time I 
can spare from my own business this season, I shall be compelled 
to give to politics. Respectfully Yours A. LIISTCOLIST 

1 ALS, ORB. Herbruger's letter is on the letterhead of the "Hall of Harrison 
Literary Institute," Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and he signs himself as "Sec- 
retary of Committee on Lectures" (DLC-RTL). See also the almost identical 
letter to Carson, supra. 



To Lyman Trumbull 1 

Hon: L. Trumbull Springfield, Ills. April 7 1860 

My dear Sir: Reaching home from Chicago, where I have been 
engaged two weeks in the trial of a lawsuit, I found your letter of 
March 26th. 

Of course you can do no better for Delahay than you promise. 2 
I am trying to keep out of the contest among our friends for the 
Gubernatorial nomination; 8 but from what I hear, the result is in 
considerable doubt. 

We have just had a clear party victory in our city election; and 
our friends are more encouraged, and our enemies more cowed by 
it, than by anything since the organization of the Republican 
party. Last year we carried the city; but we did it, not by our own 
strength; but by an open feud among our enemies. This year their 
feud was healed; and we beat them fairly by main strength. 

I can scarcely give an opinion as to what effect a nomination of 
Judge McLean, by the Union convention, would have. 4 I do not 
believe he would accept it; and if he did, that fact alone, I think, 
would shut him out of the Chicago convention. If he were ten 
years younger he would be our best candidate. Yours as ever 

A. 

[40] 



APRIL 10, i860 

1 ALS, CSmH. 2 Vide supra, Lincoln to Trumbull, March 16, n.a. 

3 Richard Yates received the Republican nomination and was elected. 

4 Trumbull had written March 26 that he had heard the Union Convention 
would nominate Judge John McLean (DLC-RTL). 

Speech at Bloomington, Illinois 1 

April 10, 1860 

On Tuesday evening last, Hon. Abram Lincoln delivered a 
speech at Phoenix Hall in this city, of which we took tolerably 
full note, and of -which we should be pleased to give a fuller no- 
tice than the crowded state of our columns today will permit. "We 
shall, however, endeavor to state his points distinctly, and in such 
a manner as to do him no injustice. 

After a few apologetic remarks, the speaker proceeded to com- 
ment upon polygamy in Utah, and the recent action in the United 
States house of representatives on that subject. 2 He said his main 
object in doing so was to call attention to the views and action of 
gentlemen who held to the doctrine of popular sovereignty, as re- 
lated to the suppression of polygamy. These gentlemen, he said, 
were less than half the democratic members of the house south- 
ern democrats voting for the anti-polygamy bill, because it favored 
the doctrine that congress could control the subject of slavery in 
the territories. But the Illinois democrats, although as much op- 
posed to polygamy as any body else, dare not vote for the bill, be- 
cause it was opposed to Mr. Douglas. 

Mr. McClernand, of Illinois, had proposed to suppress the evil 
of polygamy by dividing up the territory, and attaching the differ- 
ent portions to other territories. He admitted that he had not seen 
Col. McClernand's speech on the subject; but proceeded to com- 
ment upon his action, nevertheless. McClernand's proposition was 
in harmony with the views formerly suggested by Mr. Douglas in 
a speech at Springfield; and he gave him credit for consistency, at 
least. But, inquired the speaker, how much better was it to divide 
up the territory and attach its parts to others? It was effecting in- 
directly that which Mr. McClernand denied could be done di- 
rectly. This inconsistency, Mr. Lincoln illustrated by a classic ex- 
ample of a similar inconsistency: "If I cannot rightfully murder a 
man, I may tie him to the tail of a kicking horse, and let him kick 
the man to death!" 

But why divide up the territory at all? continued he. Something 
must be -wrong there, or it would not be necessary to act at all. And 
if one mode of interference is wrong, why not the other? Why is 
not an act dividing the territory as much against popular sover- 

[41] 



APRIL 10, i860 

eignty as one for prohibiting polygamy? If you can put down 
polygamy in that way, why may you not thus put down slavery? 

Mr. Lincoln said he supposed that the friends of popular sover- 
eignty would say if they dared speak out that polygamy was 
wrong and slavery right; and therefore one might thus be put 
down and the other not; and after supposing several other things 
of northern democrats, he proceeded to notice, what he called, Mr. 
Douglas's sedition law. 3 

On the subject of the proposed law, he began by reading Mr. 
Douglas's resolution as offered to the senate. Everything prohibited 
in the resolution, said he, is wrong, and ought to be prohibited and 
punished. There was now no such law against them, simply, as he 
supposed, because nobody had thought the crimes enumerated in 
the resolution would ever be committed. And, moreover, he de- 
clared, not one of them ever had been committed! He defied any 
one to point to a single instance where the authorities or the 
people of one state had invaded another: or where there had been 
a conspiracy or combination to interfere with the institutions or 
property of the people in one state by citizens of another! John 
Brown, to be sure, had made a raid into Virginia; but Virginia had 
been competent to deal with him and his confederates without a 
congressional law; and hence no such law was necessary. Insur- 
rections had always been put down; hence no law was necessary 
against them. What, then, inquired the speaker, was the real ob- 
ject of Mr. Douglas's proposition? He then quoted from that gen- 
tleman's speech on the subject, in which he says that Brown's raid 
into Virginia, and similar outrages, were the legitimate and logical 
result of the abolition teachings of the day. Then, said Mr. Lin- 
coln, I conceive the real object of the proposed bill was to put 
down republicanism; to prevent republican meetings, and to shut 
men's mouths! If, however, he added, the only object is to punish 
negro-dealers, he had no objection. But he denied that any body 
had ever conspired to steal negroes. 

The speaker then went on to comment on the proposed law, as 
if it was only meant to suppress free speech; addressed his re- 
marks chiefly to Mr. Douglas, and throughout the speech seemed 
to consider him as the only man in the democratic party who was 
worthy of attention. A few words on the question why, if states 
and territories may introduce slavery, McLean county, or any in- 
dividual may not, according to popular sovereignty, do the same, 
concluded the speech. 

1 Illinois State Register., April 17, 1860, copied from Bloomington Statesman 
(undated) . 

[42] 



APRIL 14, i860 

2 H.R. 7, introduced by Representative Justin S. Morrill of Vermont, to 
punish the practice of polygamy, etc , passed the House April 5, but died in 
the Senate. 

3 Douglas' resolution introduced in the Senate January 16, calling on the 
Committee on the Judiciary to introduce a bill to protect a state or territory 
against invasion, etc., was tabled February i. 



To James F. Babcock 1 

Jas. F. Babcock, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: April 14. 1860 

Reaching home, after a short absence, I find your obliging letter 
of the 8th. I was very anxious for the result in Connecticut, and 
am much gratified that it is all safe. 

As to the Presidential nomination, claiming no greater exemp- 
tion from selfishness than is common, I still feel that my whole as- 
piration should be, and therefore must be, to be placed anywhere, 
or nowhere, as may appear most likely to advance our cause. 

As to the names of confidential friends here, with whom you 
might correspond, I give you David Davis, Bloomington, His. 

Julius White, 2 Chicago, 
Dr. I. A. W. Buck, Aurora, " 
A. Sympson, Carthage " 

I will add that Hon J. W. Grimes & Hon. S. R. Curtis, Senator 
& Representative from Iowa, are very friendly to me, though I 
do not know that they favor my nomination. The f ollowing named 
gentlemen are probably for me and would like to correspond 
with you. 

Hon: Saml. Galloway, Columbus, O. 
" Robt. C. Schenck, Dayton, O 
cc j -yv Gorden, 3 Indianapolis, la. 
W. T. Page, Esq. Evansville, la. 
Hawkins Taylor, Esq. Keokuk, Iowa 

Please do not understand that I wish to task you with the open- 
ing of a correspondence with all these gentlemen; I mean no more 
than to furnish you the names, and leave the rest to your own 
pleasure. 

Please make my respects to your family, and believe me Yours 
very truly A. LmcoLisr 

1 ALS, IHi. Babcock's letter of April 8 asked for names of prominent Re- 
publicans "who are your confidential friends, to whom I can write. . . ." (DLC- 
RTL). 

2 Not previously" identified, Julius White was an insurance agent at Chicago, 
and Ira A, W. Buck was in the real estate and insurance business at Aurora, 
[llinois. 

[43] 



APRIL 4, i860 

3 Not previously identified, Jonathan W. Gordon, whose name Lincoln mis- 
spelled, was a lawyer and a doctor at Indianapolis, and William T. Page was 
cashier of the Canal Bank at Evansville, Indiana. 

To Mark W. Delahay 1 

M. W. Delahay, Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir April 14, 1860 

Reaching home last night I find your letter of the /th. You 
know I was in New-England. Some of the acquaintances I made 
while there, write me since the elections that the close vote in 
Conn. & the quasi defeat in R.I. are a drawback upon the prospects 
of Gov. Seward; and Trumbull writes Dubois to the same effect. 
Do not mention this as coming from me. Both those states are safe 
enough for us in the fall. I see by the despaches that since you 
wrote, Kansas has appointed Delegates and instructed them for 
Seward. Dont stir them up to anger, but come along to the con- 
vention, & I will do as I said about expenses. 2 Yours as ever 

A. 



1 ALS, DLC-HW. Delahay wrote on April 9 that the Kansas delegates were 
not instructed, but that a resolution was passed declaring Seward first choice 
(DLC-RTL). 

2 See Lincoln to Delahay, March 16, supra. Delahay was not appointed dele- 
gate, but Lincoln took the hint that he should have "some discreet friends'* at 
the convention early. 

To Solomon Sturges 1 

Mr. Solomon Sturges Springfield, 

Dear Sir: April 14, 1860 

Yours of the gth. is received; and, allow me to say, I should not 
disagree with you in many of the opinions therein expressed. 

"Whether I shall be able to attend the Chicago convention, I have 
not yet determined; and so, of course, I can not yet say whether I 
can accept your very kindly proffered hospitality. Yours very truly 

A, LINCOLN 

1 AL.S, owned by Burton Sturges, Chicago, Illinois. Solomon Sturges, a Chi- 
cago banker, wrote his views on slavery and offered Lincoln a room in his home 
during the convention, 

To WTaom It May Concern 1 

Whom it may concern. Springfield, April 14, 1860 

The bearer of this, Dr. Theodore Canissius, is the editor and 
proprietor of the Republican newspaper, published in German 

[44] 



APRIL 29, i860 

here; and is a true and worthy man. Any kindness and attention 
shown him will be appreciated by me. A. LINCOLN 

i ALS, owned by M. L. Wilson, Chevy Chase, Maryland. 

To Hawkins Taylor 1 

Hawkins Taylor, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: April 2 1 , 1 860 

Yours of the igth. is just received. It surprises me that you 
have written twice, without receiving an answer. I have answered 
all I ever received from you; and certainly one since my return 
from the East. 

Opinions here, as to the prospect of Douglas being nominated, 
are quite conflicting some very confident he will., and others that 
he will not be. I think his nomination possible; but that the 
chances are against him. 

I am glad there is a prospect of your party passing this way to 
Chicago. Wishing to make your visit here as pleasant as we can, 
we wish you to notify us as soon as possible, whether you come 
this way, how many, and when you will arrive. Yours very truly 

A. LINCOLN 

!ALS, laHA. Taylor's letters dated February 15 and 25 and that of April 
15 are in the Lincoln Papers, but there is no record of Lincoln's replying prior 
to April 21. Taylor's answer of April 25 states that since the railroads will not 
give half fare Keokuk will not send a full delegation, but that he himself will 
attend (DLG-RTL). 

To Lyman Trambull 1 

Hon: L. Trumbull: Springfield, 

My dear Sir: April 29. 1860 

Yours of the 24th. was duly received; and I have postponed an- 
swering it, hoping by the result at Charleston, to know who is to 
lead our adversaries, before writing. But Charleston hangs fire, and 
I wait no longer. 

As you request, I will be entirely frank. The taste is in my 
mouth a little; and this, no doubt, disqualifies me, to some extent, 
to form correct opinions. You may confidently rely, however, that 
by no advice or consent of mine, shall my pretentions be pressed 
to the point of endangering our common cause. 

Now, as to my opinions about the chances of others in Illinois. 
I think neither Seward nor Bates can carry Illinois if Douglas 
shall be on the track; and that either of them can, if he shall not 
be. I rather think McLean could carry it with D. on or off in 

[45] 



MAY 1, i860 

other words, I think McLean is stronger in Illinois, taking all sec- 
tions of it, than either S. or B; and I think S. the weakest of the 
three. I hear no objection to McLean, except his age; but that ob- 
jection seems to occur to every one 9 and it is possible it might leave 
him no stronger than the others. By the way, if we should nomi- 
nate him, how would we save to ourselves the chance of filling his 
vacancy in the Court? Have him hold on up to the moment of his 
inaugeration? Would that course be no draw-back upon us in the 
canvass? 

Recurring to Illinois, we want something here quite as much as, 
and which is harder to get than, the electoral vote the Legisla- 
ture. And it is exactly in this point that Seward's nomination 
would be hard upon us. Suppose he should gain us a thousand 
votes in Winnebago, it would not compensate for the loss of fifty 
in Edgar. 

A word now for your own special benefit. You better write no 
letters which can possibly be distorted into opposition, or quasi op- 
position to me. There are men on the constant watch for such 
things out of which to prejudice my peculiar friends against you. 
While I have no more suspicion of you than I have of my best 
friend living, I am kept in a constant struggle against suggestions 
of this sort. I have hesitated some to write this paragraph, lest you 
should suspect I do it for my own benefit, and not for yours; but 
on reflection I conclude you will not suspect me. 

Let no eye but your own see this not that there is anything 
wrong, or even ungenerous, in it; but it would be misconstrued. 
Your friend as ever A. 

i ALS, CSmH. 



To Cyrus M. Allen 1 

Hon: C. M. Allen: Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: May i. 1860. 

Your very kind letter of the a 7th. was received yesterday. This 
writing being early in the morning, Douglas is not yet nominated; 
but we suppose he certainly will be before sun-set to-day, a few 
of the smaller Southern states having seceded from the convention 
just enough to permit his nomination, and not enough to hurt 
him much at the election. This puts the case in the hardest shape 
for us. But fight we must; and conquer we shall; in the end. 

Our friend Dubois, and Judge David Davis, of Bloomington, one 
or both, will meet you at Chicago on the 12th. 

[46] 



MAY 2 5 i860 

If you let Usher & Griswold 2 of Terre-Haute know, I think they 
will co-operate with you. Yours very truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS-F, ISLA. Cyrus M. Allen was a lawyer at Vincennes, Indiana. 

2 John P. Usher, lawyer, who became Secretary of the Interior in 1862; and 
William D. Griswold, lawyer, and later president of the Ohio and Mississippi 
Railroad. 



To Lyman Trumbull 1 

PRIVATE 

Hon: L. Trumbull Springfield, May i. 1860 

Dear Sir: In my last letter to you I believe I said I thought Mr. 
Seward would be weaker in Illinois than Mr. Bates. I write this 
to qualify that opinion so far as to say I think S. weaker than B. 
in our close Legislative districts; but probably not weaker taking 
the whole State over. 

We now understand that Douglas will be nominated to-day by 
what is left of the Charleston convention. All parties here dislike 
it. Republicans and Danites, that he should be nominated at all; 
and Doug. Dem's that he should not be nominated by an undi- 
vided convention. Yours as ever A. LINCOLN 

* ALS, CSmH. 

To Richard M. Corwine 1 

PRIVATE 

Hon: R. M. Corwine Springfield, Ills. May 2. 1860. 

Dear Sir: Yours of the 3Oth. ult. is just received. After what you 
have said, it is perhaps proper I should post you, so far as I am 
able, as to the "lay of the land." First then, I think the Illinois 
delegation will be unanamous for me at the start; and no other 
delegation will. A few individuals in other delegations would like 
to go for me at the start, but may be restrained by their colleagues. 
It is represented to me, by men who ought to know, that the whole 
of Indiana might not be difficult to get. You know how it is in 
Ohio. I am certainly not the first choice there; and yet I have not 
heard that any one makes any positive objection to me. It is just 
so everywhere so far as I can perceive. Everywhere, except in Illi- 
nois, and possibly Indiana, one or another is prefered to me, but 
there is no positive objection. This is the ground as it now appears. 
I believe you personally know C. M. Allen, of Vincennes, la. 2 He 
is a delegate, and has notified me that the entire la. delegation will 

[47] 



MAY 2 9 i860 

be in Chicago the same day you name Saturday the 12th. My 
friends Jesse K. Dubois, our Auditor, & Judge David Davis, will 
probably be there ready to confer with friends from other States. 
Let me hear from you again when anything occurs. Yours very 

A. 



1 ALS, owned by Mrs. Lewis S. Thompson, Red Bank, New Jersey. A copy 
of Corwine's letter of April 30 in Lincoln's handwriting is preserved in the 
Lincoln Papers, perhaps because Lincoln turned the original over to his cam- 
paign managers. Gorwine states his positive preference for Lincoln and his be- 
lief that ". . . we can not elect extreme men. Moderation in their past life & 
their present views, must mark them, or we can not elect. . . ." (DLG-RTL) . 

2 Abbreviation for Indiana. 

To James G. Wilson 1 

Mr. James G. Wilson. Springfield, May 2, 1860. 

My Dear Friend: I am greatly obliged for the volume of your 
friend Fitz Greene Halleck's poems. Many a month has passed 
since I have met with anything more admirable than his beautiful 
lines on Burns. With Alnwick Castle, Marco Bozzaris, and Red 
Jacket, I am also much pleased. 

It is wonderful that you should have seen and known a sister of 
Robert Burns. You must tell me something about her when we 
meet again. Yours very truly, A. 



1 Tracy, p. 147. James G. Wilson was editor of the Chicago Record, a monthly 
devoted to religion, literature, and fine arts. 

Remarks to Republican State Convention, 
Decatur, Illinois 1 

May 9, 1860 

He stated that, some thirty years ago, then just emigrating to 
the State, he stopped with his mother's family, for one season, in 
what is now Macon County; that he built a cabin, split rails, and 
cultivated a small farm down on the Sangamon River, some six or 
eight miles from Decatur. These, he was informed, were taken 
from that fence; but, whether they were or not, he had mauled 
many and many better ones since he had grown to manhood. The 
cheers were renewed with the same vigor when he concluded his 
remarks. 

1 New York Tribune, May 22, 1860 Lincoln's brief remarks were made in 
response to a spontaneous call which arose from the floor of the convention 
when John Hanks carried two rails into the convention hall, bearing the fol- 
lowing inscription: "ABRAHAM LINCOLN. The Rail Candidate FOR PRESI- 

[48] 



MAY 12, i860 

IINT 1860. Two rails from a lot of 3,000 made in 830 by Thos. Hanks and 
Abe Lincoln whose father was the first pioneer of Macon County." {I 
The Tribune report of the inscription is in error concerning Hanks' name. 



To Mark W. Delahay 1 

Hon: M. W. Delahay Springfield, 

My dear Sir May 12. 1860 

Yours informing me of your arrival in Chicago was duly re- 
ceived. Dubois, our A[uditor, goes] to Chicago to-day; and he 
will hand you $ [? . The] remainder will come before you leave 
the s[tate.] 2 

Look to Minnesota and Iowa rather, esp [ecially Iowa. Be] care- 
ful to give no offence, and keep cool under all circumstances 
Yours in haste A. LINCOLN. 

1 ALS, RPB. The original is mutilated. Words restored in brackets follow 
Angle, p. 243. 2 See Lincoln to Delahay, March 16 and April 14, supra. 



To Edward Wallace 1 

Dr. Edward Wallace: Springfield, Ills. May 12. 1860 

My dear Sir Your brother, Dr. W. S. Wallace, shows me a 
letter of yours, in which you request him to inquire if you may 
use a letter of mine to you, in which something is said upon the 
Tariff question. 2 I do not precisely remember what I did say in 
that letter; but I presume I said nothing substantially different 
from what I shall say now. 

In the days of Henry Clay I was a Henry Clay-tariff -man; and 
my views have undergone no material change upon that subject. I 
now think the Tariff question ought not to be agitated in the Chi- 
cago convention; but that all should be satisfied on that point, with 
a presidential candidate, whose antecedents give assurance that he 
would neither seek to force a tariff -law by Executive influence; 
nor yet to arrest a reasonable one, by a veto, or otherwise. Just 
such a candidate I desire shall be put in nomination. I really have 
no objection to these views being publicly known; but I do wish to 
thrust no letter before the public now, upon any subject. Save me 
from the appearance of obtrusion; and I do not care who sees this, 
or my former letter. Yours very truly A. LINCOLN. 

1 ALS copy, DLC-RTL. Lincoln preserved a copy in an envelope addressed 
to Dr. "Wallace at Chicago, where Wallace "was attending the convention. 

2 Vide supra, October 11, 1859. 

[49] 



To Carl Schurz 1 

Hon: Carl Schurz. Springfield, Ills. 



My dear Sir Ma ^ 4 4- 1860 

AUow me to introduce my friend, Jesse K. Dubois, our Illinois 
State Auditor. Yours truly A - LINCOLN 

1ALS, DLC-Schurz Papers Carl Schurz was at the time chairman of the 
Wisconsin delegation at the Republican National Convention, pledged to vote 
for the nomination of William H. Seward. 



Endorsement on the Margin of 
the Missouri Democrat* 

[May 17, 1860] 

I agree with Seward in his "Irrepressible Conflict," "but I do not 
endorse his "Higher Law" doctrine. Make no contracts that will 
bind me. 

1 Herndon, III, 462. According to Herndon, "The day before the nomination 
the editor [Edward L. Baker] of the Springfield Journal arrived in Chicago 
with a copy of the Missouri Democrat y in which Lincoln had marked three 
passages referring to Seward's position on the slavery question. On the margin 
of the paper he had written in pencil . . . . " the communication as above. 



Response to a Serenade 1 

May 18, 1860 

Mr. Lincoln said that he did not suppose the honor o such a 
visit was intended particularly for himself, as a private citizen, 
but rather to the representative of a great party; and in reference 
to his position on the political questions of the day, he referred his 
numerous and enthusiastic hearers to his previous public letters 
and speeches. His speech was a perfect model in its way, and the 
loud applause with which it was greeted shows that it struck the 
right place in the minds of his hearers. Just previous to the con- 
clusion of his speech, Mr. Lincoln said he would invite the whole 
crowd into his house if it was large enough to hold them, (A voice, 
"We will give you a larger house on the fourth of next March") 
but as it could not contain more than a fraction of those who were 
in front of it, he would merely invite as many as could find room. 2 

* Illinois State Journal, May 19, 1860. The serenade concluded an enthusi- 
astic Republican parade to the Lincoln home, following adjournment of a rally 
in the State House at nine o'clock, P.M. 

2 The Journal continues, "Deafening cheers greeted the invitation, and in 

[50] 



MAY 21, i860 

less than a minute Mr. Lincoln's house was invaded by as many as could 
'squeeze in!' . . . When the crowd had partially dispersed, a number of ladies 
called upon Mr. Lincoln and wished him success in the coming campaign." 

Reply to Committee of the Republican 
National Convention 1 

May 19, 1860 

Mr. Chairman and gentlemen of the committee, I tender [to] 
you, and through you [to] the Republican National Convention, 
and all the people represented in it, my profoundest thanks for 
the high honor done me, which you now formally announce. 

Deeply, and even painfully sensible of the great responsibility 
which is inseparable from that [this high] honor a responsibility 
which I could almost wish had fallen upon some one of the far 
more eminent men and experienced statesmen whose distinguished 
names were before the Convention, I shall, by your leave, consider 
more fully the resolutions of the Convention, denominated the 
platform, and without unseasonable [unnecessary or unreason- 
able] delay, respond to you, Mr. Chairman, in writing not doubt- 
ing now, that the platform will be found satisfactory, and the 
nomination [gratefully] accepted. 

And now, I will not longer defer the pleasure of taking you, and 
each of you, by the hand. 

1 Illinois State Journal, May 21, 1860; New York Tribune, May 25, 1860* 
The Tribune variations in the text are bracketed. The committee consisting of 
the president of the convention George Ashmun of Massachusetts and the chair- 
men of the various state delegations arrived at the Lincoln home sometime after 
eight o'clock, P.M. Gathered in the "large north parlor," they heard a brief 
notification speech by Ashmun and Lincoln's reply. Afterwards Ashmun intro- 
duced the delegates personally to Lincoln. 

To Joshua R. Giddings 1 

COPT. 

Hon: J. R. Giddings: Springfield, Ills. May 21. 1860 

My good friend: Your very kind and acceptable letter of the 
igth. was duly handed me by Mr. Tuck. 2 It is indeed, most grate- 
ful to my feelings, that the responsible position assigned me, conies 
without conditions, save only such honorable ones as are fairly im- 
plied. I am not wanting in the purpose, though I may fail in the 
strength, to maintain my freedom from bad influences. Your letter 
comes to my aid in this point, most opportunely. May the Al- 
mighty grant that the cause of truth, justice, and humanity, shall 
in no wise suffer at my hands. 

[si] 445072 



MAY 23, i860 

Mrs L joins me in sincere wishes for your health, happiness, 
and long life. A LINCOLN. 

1 ALS copy, DLC-RTL. Although marked "copy" by Lincoln, the document 
appears because of a few transpositions and emendations to be the first draft 
Giddings wrote from Chicago that Lincoln had been nominated because of his 
honesty and freedom from corrupt men and that he should place himself under 
obligations to no one. 

2 Amos Tuck, former U.S. representative (1847-1853) from Exeter, New 
Hampshire, who filled a speaking engagement at Springfield on May 21. 

To George Ashrnun 1 

Hon: George Ashmun: Springfield, Ills. May 23. 1860 

President of the Republican National Convention. 

Sir: I accept the nomination tendered me by the Con- 
vention over which you presided, and of which I am formally ap- 
prized in the letter of yourself and others, acting as a committee of 
the convention, for that purpose. 

The declaration of principles and sentiments, which accom- 
panies your letter, meets my approval; and it shall be my care not 
to violate, or disregard it, in any part. 

Imploring the assistance of Divine Providence, and with due 
regard to the views and feelings of all who were represented in the 
convention; to the rights of all the states, and territories, and peo- 
ple of the nation; to the inviolability of the constitution, and the 
perpetual union, harmony, and prosperity of all, I am most happy 
to co-operate for the practical success of the principles declared by 
the convention. Your obliged friend, and fellow citizen 

A. 



1 ALS-P, ISLA; ADfS, DLC-R.TL. The letter is accompanied by a copy in 
Lincoln's handwriting of the letter of Ashmun and others to Lincoln, May 18, 
1860, which copy Ashmun requested in a letter dated May ai, for purposes of 
publication (DLC-RTL). Apparently Ashmun had not preserved a complete 
copy of his letter written as chairman and bearing the signature of the othor 
members of the convention committee, and therefore asked Lincoln to furnish 
a copy along with his answer. Lincoln to Ashmun., May 26, infra., indicates that 
both Lincoln's answering letter dated May 23 and his copy of Ashmun's letter 
dated May 18 were sent on May 26. Whether Lincoln had mailed an earlier 
copy of his letter of acceptance on May 23, the day it was writ ton, is not cer- 
tain, since no other original ALS is known. One infers, however, that Lincoln 
had composed the draft preserved in the Lincoln Papers on May 23, that in 
reply to Ashmun's request of May 21, he copied it, together with a copy of 
Ashmun's letter of notification, and mailed them on May 26. If so, the addi- 
tional letter of May 23, infra,, presents a further puzzle. The original has not 
been located, and there is some question of its authenticity, unless the original 
is forthcoming. It appears, however, to have a place and function only if Lin- 
coln did not compose his final reply until May 26, and then dated it back to 
May 23 both in the draft and the letter sent. The brevity and haste apparent 
in the contents of the short letter {infra) may indicate this conclusion. 

[52] 



To George Ashmuzi 1 

Hon. George Ashmun: Springfield, Ills. May 23 1860 

Sir: Your letter I have just received. The principles as repre- 

sented has my approval. It is my purpose upon my nomination to 

issue a Statement. 

I will be happy to co-operate for the practical success of the 

principles as put forth by the Convention. Yours very truly 

A. LirrcoiJNr. 
1 Hertz, II, 773. For discussion of this letter see the note to letter supra. 

To George Ashmun 1 

Private 

Hon: Geo. Ashmun Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: May 26. 1860 

Herewith is a copy of the Committe's letter to me, as you re- 
quested; together "with my answer. The answer, I hope, is suffi- 
ciently brief to do no harm. Yours very truly A. LINCOUNT 

1 ALS-P, I SLA. The letter is written on the bottom of the page which bears 
Lincoln's transcription of Ashmun's letter of notification, May 18, 1860. For 
discussion of the letter, see the note, Lincoln to Ashmun, May 23, supra. 

To Salmon R Chase 1 

Hon. S. E Chase. Springfield, Ills. May 26, 1860. 

My dear Sir: It gave me great pleasure to receive yours, mis- 
takenly dated, May 1 7. Holding myself the humblest of all "whose 
names were before the convention, I feel in especial need of the as- 
sistance of all; and I am glad very glad of the indication that 
you stand ready. It is a great consolation that so nearly all all ex- 
cept Mr. Bates & Mr. Clay, 2 I believe, of those distinguished and 
able men, are already in high position to do service in the common 
cause. Your Obt Servt A. 



1 Copy, DLC-RTL. Although Chase's letter is dated May 17, the envelope is 
postmarked May 19, indicating that it was not sent until the day following the 
nomination (DLC-RTL). 

2 Cassius M. Clay, the noted Kentucky abolitionist, had run second to Senator 
Hannibal Hamlin of Maine in the balloting for candidate for vice-president. 

To Cassius M. Clay 1 

Hon. C. M. Clay. Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: May 26, 1860 

Yours of the 2ist. is received, and for which I sincerely thank 
you. The humblest of all whose names were before the convention, 

[53] 



MAY 26, i860 

I shall, in the canvass, and especially afterwards, if the result shall 
devolve the administration upon me, need the support of all the 
talent, popularity, and courage, North and South, which is in the 
party; and it is with sincere gratification that I receive this early 
indication of your unwavering purpose to stand for the right. Your 
Obt. Servt. A - LINCOLN 

i ALS-F, ISLA. 

To Schuyler Colfax 1 

Private 

Hon. Schuyler Colfax Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: May 26. 1860 

Your very kind, and acceptable letter of the i8th. was received 
two or three days since. 

You distinguish between yourself and my original friends 2 a 
distinction which, by your leave, I propose to forget. 

I have acted upon your suggestion, and also upon my own im- 
pulse, in relation to our old friend R. W. T. 8 Yours very truly 

A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS-F, ISLA. 

2 A supporter of Edward Bates for the presidential nomination, Colfax had 
written, "I need not say how heartily I join with your original friends in their 
greetings to you" (DLC-RTL) . 

3 Colfax had suggested that Lincoln write Richard W. Thompson, leader of 
the Union Party in Indiana, candidates of which were John Bell and Edward 
Everett. Lincoln's letter to Thompson is presumably not extant. 

To S. Wells Cone 1 

S. Wells Cone, Esq Springfield, 

Dear Sir: May 26. 1860 

Yours of the 24th. with newspaper slips, is received; and in an- 
swer, I have to say I expect to be at home constantly for some 
weeks. Yours very truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, owned by R. A. Ramsdell, Wilmington, Delaware. Sylvester Wells 
Cone was associated with his brother David D. Cone in publishing the Sumner, 
Kansas, Gazette. His letter of May 24, 1860, is not in the Lincoln Papers. 

To C. F. Mitchell 1 

C. F. Mitchell, Esq. Springfield, HI, May 26, 1860. 

Dear Sir Yours of the 23 with your business card, and news- 
paper extracts, is received, and for which I have only time to say 
I thank you. Yours etc., A LINCOLN 

[54] 



MAY 26, i860 

1 Hertz, II, 774. The original letter has not been found, and there is no letter 
from Mitchell dated May 23, 1860, in the Lincoln Papers. There are, however, 
letters from C. F. Mitchell of Flemingsburg, Kentucky, November 15, 1860, and 
January 27, 1861. He describes himself as a Quaker and Republican, almost 
alone in his region. 

To Caleb B. Smith 1 

Hon: C. B. Smith Springfield, Ills. May 26. 1860 

My dear Sir: Yours of the 2ist. was duly received; but I have 
found no time till now, to say a word in the way of answer. I am, 
indeed, much indebted to Indiana; and, as my home friends tell 
me, much to you personally. Your saying you no longer consider 
la. 2 a doubtful state, is very gratifying. The thing starts well every- 
where too well, I almost fear, to last. But we are in, and stick or 
go through, must be the word. 

Let me hear from Indiana occasionally. Your friend, as ever 

A. LINCOLN. 

i ALS, PMA. 2 Indiana. 

To Leonard Swett 1 

Dear Swett Springfield, May 26, 1860 

I see no objection to the letter you have written to Shaffer. Send 
it to him, but do not let him know I have seen it; and, by a post- 
script, tell him to come down and see me. Yours as ever 

A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, owned by David Davis IV, Bloomington, Illinois. Swett had written 
Lincoln (no date, but probably May 25) enclosing a letter from John W. 
Shaffer of Freeport and also the letter he intended to send in reply to Shaffer, 
concerning party jealousies. Swett had promised certain Illinois and Pennsyl- 
vania delegates who were for Seward and Cameron that if they went for Lin- 
coln they would be treated fairly. Swett thought these delegates later worked 
for Lincoln (DLC-RTL). 

To Lyman Trumbull 1 

Hon: L. Trumbull: Springfield, May 26, 1860 

My dear Sir: I have received three letters from you since the 
nomination, for all which I sincerely thank you. As you say, if we 
can not get our state up now, I do not see when we can. The nomi- 
nations start well here, and everywhere else, so far as I have heard. 
We may have a back-set yet. Give my respects to the Republican 
Senators; and especially to Mr. Hamlin, Mr. Seward, Gen. Cam- 
eron, and Mr. Wade. 
Also to your good wife. 

[55] 



MAY 26, i860 

Write again; and do not write so short letters as I do. Your 
friend, as ever' A - Lmcou* 

i ALS, CSmH. 

To Elihu B. Washburne 1 

Hon: E. B. Washburne Springfield, Ills. May 26, 1860 

My dear Sir: I have several letters from you written since the 
nomination; but, till now, have found no moment to say a word 
by way of answer. Of course I am glad that the nomination is 
well received by our friends, and I sincerely thank you for so in- 
forming me. So far as I can learn, the nominations start well 
everywhere; and, if they get no back-set, it would seem as if they 
are going through. 

I hope you will write often; and as you write more rapidly 
than I do, dont make your letters so short as mine. Yours very 
truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, owned by Hempstead Wasliburne, Chicago, Illinois. 

To Samuel Haycraft 1 

Hon. Saml. Haycraft Springfield, Ills. 

Dear Sir: May 28. 1860 

Your recent letter, without date, is received. Also the copy of 
your speech on the contemplated Daniel Boone monument, which 
I have not yet had time to read. In the main you are right about 
my history. My father was Thomas Lincoln, and Mrs. Sally 
Johnston, was his second wife. You are mistaken about my mother 
her maiden name was Nancy Hanks. 2 I was not born at Eliza- 
bethtown; but my mother's first child, a daughter, two years older 
than myself, and now long since deceased, was. I was born Feb. 12. 
1809, near where Hogginsville [Hodgenville] now is, then in 
Hardin county. I do not think I ever saw you, though I very well 
know who you are so well that I recognized your hand-writing, 
on opening your letter, before I saw the signature. My recollec- 
tion is that Ben. Helm was first Clerk, that you succeeded him, 
that Jack Thomas and "William Farleigh 3 graduated in the same 
office, and that your handwritings were all very similar. Am I 
right? 

My father has been dead near ten years; but my step-mother, 
(Mrs. Johnson) is still living. 

I am really very glad of your letter, and shall be pleased to re- 
ceive another at any time. Yours very truly A. LINCOLN 

[56] 



MAY 31, i860 

* ALS-P, ISLA. Samuel Haycraft was circuit clerk at Elizabethtown, Ken- 
tucky. The letter to which Lincoln replied is not in the Lincoln Papers, the ear- 
liest letter from Haycraft being the one of August 19, 1860. 

2 It is unfortunate that Haycraft's letter is not extant, for Lincoln scholars 
have long wondered about his mistake. His later testimony to Herndon about 
Nancy Hanks' identity seems not to have been clear. It has been assumed that 
Haycraft's letter referred to Sally Bush Johnston as Lincoln's mother, but the 
assumption is hardly tenable since Haycraft knew about Thomas Lincoln's 
early residence at Elizabethtown and could scarcely have identified her as the 
mother of Thomas Lincoln's first child, whom he supposed to have been Abra- 
ham instead of Sarah. Probably Haycraft did not know Nancy Hanks at all, 
and in common with others among his Kentucky contemporaries, who began 
cudgeling their brains after Lincoln's nomination, confused her, as well as her 
mother with another notorious "Nancy" whose reputation has survived the 
years because of its unsavory quality. In spite of diligent research and scholarly 
criticism of sources, the status of research on the lineage of Nancy Hanks must 
be summarized as inconclusive. The best sources are Louis A. Warren, Lin- 
coln's Parentage & Childhood (c 1926) and William E. Barton, The Lineage 
of Lincoln (1929) and The Paternity of Abraham Lincoln (1920). See also 
Warren's excellent statement of the case for Nancy Hanks in The Lincoln 
Kinsman, No. 33. 

3 All three men were lawyers practicing in Hardin County, Kentucky. 

To Leonard Swett 1 

Hon. L. Swett: " Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir May 30. 1860 

Your letter, written to go to N.Y. is long, but substantially right, 
I believe. You heard Weed converse with me, 2 and you now have 
Putnams letter. It can not have failed to strike you that these men 
ask for just, the same thing fairness., and fairness only. This, so 
far as in my power, they, and all others, shall have. If this suggests 
any modification of, or addition to, your letter, make it accord- 
ingly. Burn this, not that there is any thing wrong in it; but be- 
cause it is best not to be known that I write at all. Yours as ever 

A. 



1 AL.S, owned by David Davis IV, Bloomington, Illinois. Swett wrote to Lin- 
coln May 27, enclosing his reply to James O. Putnam (postmaster at Buffalo, 
New York, under Fillmore, and several times member of the New York Senate) 
and commenting, "I am afraid my letter will be regarded as reflecting your 
sentiments &. . . thought it but prudent to let you peruse it" (DLC-RTL) , 

2 Thurlow Weed, publisher of the Albany, New York, Evening Journal and 
Seward's political manager, visited Lincoln on May 24. 

To Schuyler Colfax 1 

Hon. Schuyler Colfax. Springfield, Ills, 

My dear Sir: May 31. 1860 

Yours of the 2 6th. is received; and so far from regarding it as 
presumptuous, I should be right glad to have one from you every 

[57] 



MAY 31-, i860 

maH. Bear this in mind, and act accordingly. You will readily un- 
derstand and appreciate why I write only very short letters. Yours 
very truly A - Lincoln 

i ALS The Rosenbacb. Company, Philadelphia and New York. Coif ax's let- 
ter of May 26, began "Although you may regard my writing you again as 
rather presumptious, when I do not know whether my letters are accepta- 
ble. . . ." and gave a summary of information gleaned from New York poli- 
ticians^ to the effect that the opposition's only hope in that state was for disaf- 
fection in Republican ranks resulting from Seward's failure (DLC-RTL) . 

To Charles C. Nott 1 

Charles C. Nott, Esq. Springfield, Ills, May 31, 1860. 

My Dear Sir: Yours of the 23rd, accompanied by a copy of the 
speech delivered by me at the Cooper Institute, and upon which 
you have made some notes for emendations, was received some 
days ago. Of course I -would not object to, but would be pleased 
rather, with a more perfect edition of that speech. 

I did not preserve memoranda of my investigations ; and I could 
not now re-examine, and make notes, without an expenditure of 
time which I can not bestow upon it. Some of your notes I do not 
understand. 

So far as it is intended merely to improve in grammar, and ele- 
gance of composition, I am quite agreed; but I do not wish the 
sense changed, or modified, to a hair's breadth. And you, not hav- 
ing studied the particular points so closely as I have, can not be 
quite sure that you do not change the sense when you do not in- 
tend it. For instance, in a note at bottom of first page, you pro- 
posed to substitute "Democrats" for "Douglas." But what I am 
saying there is true of Douglas, and is not true of "Democrats" 
generally; so that the proposed substitution would be a very con- 
siderable blunder. Your proposed insertion of "residences" though 
it would do little or no harm, is not at all necessary to the sense I 
was trying to convey. On page 5 your proposed grammatical 
change would certainly do no harm. The "impudently absurd" I 
stick to. The striking out "he" and inserting "ive" turns the sense 
exactly wrong. The striking out "upon if leaves the sense too gen- 
eral and incomplete. The sense is "act as they acted upon that 
question" not as they acted generally. 

After considering your proposed changes on page 7, I do not 
think them material, but I am willing to defer to you in relation 
to them. 

On page 9, striking out "to us" is probably right. The word 
"lawyer's" I wish retained. The word "Courts" struck out twice, I 

[58] 



MAY 3 1, i860 

wish reduced to "Court" and retained. "Court" as a collection 
more 2 properly governs the plural "have" as I understand. "The" 
preceding "Court," in the latter case, must also be retained. The 
words "quite," "as," and "or" on the same page, I wish retained. 
The italicising, and quotation marking, I have no objection to. 

As to the note at bottom, I do not think any too much is ad- 
mitted. What you propose on page 1 1 is right. I return your copy 
of the speech, together with one printed here, under my own hasty 
supervising. That at New York was printed without any super- 
vision by me. If you conclude to publish a new edition, allow me 
to see the proof-sheets. 

And now thanking you for your very complimentary letter, and 
your interest for me generally, I subscribe myself. Your friend 
and servant, A. 



1 George H. Putnam, Abraham lAncoln: The People's Leader (1909), pp. 
225-27. Nott's letter of May 23 is also given by Putnam, but the original is not 
among the Lincoln Papers. See also the note to Lincoln's address at Cooper 
Institute, February 27, supra. 

2 Tracy, p. 150, is probably incorrect in giving "collective noun" instead of 
"collection more." 



To Lyman Trumbull 1 

Hon. L. Trumbull. Springfield, Ills. May 31. 1860. 

My dear Sir: Yours of the 28th. inclosing that which I have 
carefully read, and now return, is received. Please say to Mr. Ham- 
lin that nay letter of acceptance is already written and forwarded 
to Mr. Ashmun, at Springfield, Mass; that I would send him, Mr. 
Hamlin, a copy, only that Mr. Ashmun, when here, sought and 
obtained a promise from me that I would furnish a copy to no one; 
that the letter is very short, and, I think, conflicts with none of 
Mr. Morey's suggestions, except that it may be published by Mr. 
Ashmun before the Baltimore convention. Perhaps it would be 
best for Mr. Hamlin and yourself not to communicate the fact 
that the letter of acceptance is already written. I am glad to learn 
the Philadelphia meeting had force enough to not be spoiled by the 
storm. I loot with great interest for your letters now. Your friend 
as ever, A. 



1 ALS, CSmH. Trumbull's letter of May 28 is in the Lincoln Papers, but 
the enclosure is not, and Trumbull's letter indicates nothing of its nature ex- 
cept that it had been handed to him by Hannibal Hamlin "with a request that 
I forward it to you. Mr. Hamlin tells me the writer of the letter is an eminent 
politician of Mass. . . ." (DLC-RTL) . Probably the author was George Morey, 
a wealthy lawyer at Boston, Massachusetts, 

[59] 



Form Letter to Applicants for Biographical Data 1 

(Biography) 
Dear Sir Springfield, Ills [c. June] 1860 

Your letter to Mr. Lincoln of [blank] and by which you seek 
his assistance in getting up a biographical sketch of him, is re- 
ceived. Applications of this class are so numerous that it is simply 
impossible for him to attend to them. Yours &c 

J. G. 



i AD, DLC-RTL. Lincoln obviously prepared this form for Nicolay following 

the nomination. 

Form Reply to Requests for Political Opinions 1 

(Doctrine) 
Dear Sir Springfield Ills. [c. June] 1860 

Your letter to Mr. Lincoln of [blank] and by which you seek to 
obtain Ms opinions on certain political points, has been received 
by him. He has received others of a similar character; but he also 
has a greater number of the exactly opposite character. The latter 
class beseech him to write nothing whatever upon any point of po- 
litical doctrine. They say his positions were well known when he 
was nominated, and that he must not now embarrass the canvass 
by undertaking to shift or modify them. He regrets that he can 
not oblige all, but you perceive it is impossible for him to do so. 
Yours &c J. G. NICOLAY. 

i AD, DLC-RTL. 

Autobiography Written for John L. Scripps 1 

[c. June, 1860] 

Abraham Lincoln was born Feb. 12, 1809, then in Hardin, now 
in the more recently formed county of Larue, Kentucky. His 
father, Thomas, & grand-father, Abraham, were born in Rocking- 
ham county Virginia, whither their ancestors had come from 
Berks county Pennsylvania. His lineage has been traced no farther 
back than this. 2 The family were originally quakers, though in 
later times they have fallen away from the peculiar habits of that 

1 AD, DLC-RTL. Lincoln prepared this sketch for the guidance of John L. 
Scripps, who was writing a campaign biography to be published by the Chicago 
Press and Tribune. Scripps' Life was also issued by Horace Greeley as Tribune 
Tracts No. 6. 

2 This sentence is inserted between lines. Several of Lincoln's correspondents 
had pointed out the possibility of connections with the Lincolns of Hingham, 
Massachusetts, but the links had not been fully established at the time, 

[60] 



jr TJ 3NT E-, i860 

people. The grand-father Abraham, had four brothers Isaac, 
Jacob, John & Thomas. So far as known, the descendants of Jacob 
and John are still in Virginia. Isaac went to a place near where 
Virginia, North Carolina, and Tennessee, join; and his decend- 
ants are in that region. Thomas came to Kentucky, and after many 
years, died there, whence his decendants went to Missouri. 
Abraham, grandfather of the subject of this sketch, came to Ken- 
tucky, and "was killed by Indians about the year 1784. He left a 
widow, three sons and two daughters. The eldest son, Mordecai, re- 
mained in Kentucky till late in life, when he removed to Hancock 
county, Illinois, where soon after he died, and where several of his 
descendants still reside. The second son, Josiah, removed at an 
early day to a place on Blue River, now within Harrison [Han- 
cock] county, Indiana; but no recent information of him, or his 
family, has been obtained. The eldest sister, Mary, married Ralph 
Grume and some of her descendants are now known to be in 
Breckenridge county Kentucky. The second sister, Nancy, mar- 
ried William Brumfield, and her family are not known to have 
left Kentucky, but there is no recent information from them. 
Thomas, the youngest son, and father of the present subject, by the 
early death of his father, and very narrow circumstances of his 
mother, even in childhood was a wandering laboring boy, and 
grew up litterally without education. He never did more in the 
way of writing than to bunglingly sign his own name. Before he 
was grown, he passed one year as a hired hand with his uncle 
Isaac on Wata[u]ga, a branch of the Holsteen [Holston] River. 
Getting back into Kentucky, and having reached his 2, 8th. year, he 
married Nancy Hanks mother of the present subject in the year 
1806. She also was born in Virginia; and relatives of hers of the 
name of Hanks, and of other names, now reside in Coles, in Ma- 
con, and in Adams coLinties, Illinois, and also in Iowa. The present 
subject has no brother or sister of the whole or half blood. He had 
a sister, older than himself, who was grown and married, but died 
many years ago, leaving no child. Also a brother, younger than 
himself, who died in infancy. Before leaving Kentucky he and his 
sister were sent for short periods, to A.B.C. schools, the first kept 
by Zachariah Riney, and the second by Caleb Hazel. 

At this time his father resided on Knob-creek, on the road from 
Bardstown Ky. to Nashville Tenn. at a point three, or three and a 
half miles South or South- West of Atherton's ferry on the Rolling 
Fork. From this place he removed to what is now Spencer county 
Indiana, in the autumn of 1816, A. then being in his eigth year. 
This removal was partly on account of slavery; but chiefly on ac- 

[61] 



JTUrsTE, i860 

count of the difficulty in land titles in Ky. 3 He settled in an un- 
broken forest; and the clearing away of surplus wood was the 
great task a head. A. though very young, was large of his age, 
and had an axe put into his hands at once; and from that till 
within his twentythird year, he was almost constantly handling 
that most useful instrument less, of course, in plowing and har- 
vesting seasons. At this place A. took an early start as a hunter, 
which was never much improved afterwards. (A few days before 
the completion of his eigth year, in the absence of his father, a 
flock of wild turkeys approached the new log-cabin, and A. with a 
rifle gun, standing inside, shot through a crack, and killed one of 
them. He has never since pulled a trigger on any larger game.) In 
the autumn of 1818 his mother died; and a year afterwards his 
father married Mrs. Sally Johnston, at Elizabeth-Town, Ky a 
widow, with three children of her first marriage. She proved a 
good and kind mother to A. and is still living in Coles Co. Illinois. 
There were no children of this second marriage. His father's resi- 
dence continued at the same place in Indiana, till 1830. While 
here A. went to A.B.C. schools by littles, kept successively by An- 
drew Crawford, Sweeney, 4 and Azel W. Dorsey. He does 

not remember any other. The family of Mr. Dorsey now reside in 
Schuyler Co. Illinois. A. now thinks that the agregate of all his 
schooling did not amount to one year. He was never in a college 
or Academy as a student; and never inside of a college or accad- 
emy building till since he had a law-license. What he has in the 
way of education, he has picked up. After he was twenty three, and 
had separated from his father, he studied English grammar, im- 
perfectly of course, but so as to speak and write as well as he now 
does. He studied and nearly mastered the Six-books of Euclid, since 
he was a member of Congress. He regrets his want of education, 
and does what he can to supply the want. In his tenth year he was 
kicked by a horse, and apparantly killed for a time. When he was 
nineteen, still residing in Indiana, he made his first trip upon a 
flat-boat to New-Orleans. He was a hired hand merely; and he 
and a son of the owner, 5 without other assistance, made the trip. 
The nature of part of the cargo-load, as it was called made it 
necessary for them to linger and trade along the Sugar coast and 
one night they were attacked by seven negroes -with intent to kill 
and rob them. They were hurt some in the melee, but succeeded 
in driving the negroes from the boat, and then "cut cable" 
"weighed anchor" and left. 

3 This sentence is an insertion. 4 James Swaney, not Sweeney. 

5 Allen Gentry, son of James Gentry. 

[62] 



JTU2NTE., i860 

March ist. 1830 A. having just completed his 2 ist. year, his 
father and family, with the families of the two daughters and 
sons-in-law, of his step-mother, left the old homestead in Indiana, 
and came to Illinois. Their mode of conveyance was waggons 
drawn by ox-teams, or A. drove one of the teams. They reached 
the county of Macon, and stopped there some time within the 
same month of March. His father and family settled a new place 
on the North side of the Sangamon river, at the junction of the 
timber-land and prairie, about ten miles Westerly from Decatur. 
Here they built a log-cabin, into which they removed, and made 
sufficient of rails to fence ten acres of ground, fenced and broke 
the ground, and raised a crop of sow[n] corn upon it the same 
year. These are, or are supposed to be, the rails about which so 
much is being said just now, though they are far from being the 
first, or only rails ever made by A. 

The sons-in-law, were temporarily settled at other places in the 
county. In the autumn all hands were greatly afflicted with augue 
and fever, to which they had not been used, and by which 
they were greatly discouraged so much so that they determined 
on leaving the county. They remained however, through the suc- 
ceeding winter, which was the winter of the very celebrated "deep 
snow" of Illinois. During that winter, A. together with his step- 
mother's son, John D. Johnston, and John Hanks, yet residing in 
Macon county, hired themselves to one Denton Offutt, to take a 
flat boat from Beardstown Illinois to New-Orleans; and for that 
purpose, were to join him Offut at Springfield, Ills so soon 
as the snow should go off. Wlien it did go off which was about the 
ist. of March 1831 the county was so flooded, as to make travel- 
ing by land impracticable; to obviate which difficulty the[y] pur- 
chased a large canoe and came down the Sangamon river in it. 
This is the time and the manner of A's first entrance into Sanga- 
mon County. They found Offutt at Springfield, but learned from 
him that he had failed in getting a boat at Beardstown. This lead 
to their hiring themselves to him at $12 per month, each; and 
getting the timber out of the trees and building a boat at old San- 
gamon Town on the Sangamon river, seven miles N.W. of Spring- 
field, which boat they took to New-Orleans, substantially upon 
the old contract. It 6 was in connection with this boat that occurred 

6 The remainder of this paragraph was omitted by Nicolay and Hay from 
the Complete Works in deference to Robert Todd Lincoln. In the margin of 
Hay's manuscript of Abraham Lincoln: A History, which was sent to Robert for 
approval, there is written beside Hay's account of this episode the query "Leave 
out (?)" followed by "I say leave out R. T. L." (Nicolay and Hay Papers, 
IHi). 

[63] 



JTUISTE, 1860 

the ludicrous incident of sewing up the hogs eyes. Offutt bought 
thirty odd large fat live hogs, but found difficulty in driving them 
from where [he] purchased them to the boat, and thereupon con- 
ceived the whim that he could sew up their eyes and drive them 
where he pleased. No sooner thought of than decided, he put his 
hands, including A. at the job, which they completed all but the 
driving. In their blind condition they could not be driven out of 
the lot or field they were in. This expedient failing, they were tied 
and hauled on carts to the boat. It was near the Sangamon River, 
within what is now Menard county. 

During this boat enterprize acquaintance with Offutt , who was 
previously an entire stranger, he conceved a liking for A. and 
believing he could turn him to account, he contracted with him to 
act as clerk for him, on his return from New-Orleans, in charge of 
a store and Mill at New-Salem, then in Sangamon, now in Menard 
county. Hanks had not gone to New-Orleans, but having a family, 
and being likely to be detained from home longer than at first 
expected, had turned back from St. Louis. He is the same John 
Hanks who now engineers the "rail enterprize" at Decatur; and 
is a first cousin to A's mother. A's father, with his own family & 
others mentioned, had, in pursuance of their intention, removed 
from Macon to Coles county. John D. Johnston, the step-mother's 
son, went to them; and A. stopped indefinitely, and, for the first 
time, as it were, by himself at New-Salem, before mentioned. This 
was in July 1831. Here he rapidly made acquaintances and 
friends. In less than a year Offutt's business was failing had al- 
most failed, when the Black-Hawk war of 1832 broke out. A 
joined a volunteer company, and to his own surprize, was elected 
captain of it. He says he has not since had any success in life 
which gave him so much satisfaction. He went the campaign, 
served near three months, met the ordinary hardships of such an 
expedition, but was in no battle. He now owns in Iowa, the land 
upon which his own warrants for this service, were located. Return- 
ing from the campaign, and encouraged by his great popularity 
among his immediate neighbors, he, the same year, ran for the 
Legislature and was beaten his own precinct, however, casting 
it's votes 277 for and 7, against him. And this too while he was 
an avowed Clay man, and the precinct the autumn afterwards, 
giving a majority of 115 to Genl. Jackson over Mr. Clay. This was 
the only time A was ever beaten on a direct vote of the people. He 
was now without means and out of business, but was anxious to 
remain with his friends who had treated him with so much gener- 

[64] 



jr U IV E, i860 

osity, especially as he had nothing elsewhere to go to. He studied 
what he should do thought of learning the black-smith trade 
thought of trying to study law rather thought he could not suc- 
ceed at that without a better education. Before long, strangely 
enough, a man offered to sell and did sell, to A. and another 7 as 
poor as himself, an old stock of goods, upon credit. They opened 
as merchants; and he says that was the store. Of course they did 
nothing but get deeper and deeper in debt. He was appointed Post- 
master at New-Salem the office being too insignificant, to make 
his politics an objection. The store winked out. The Surveyor of 
Sangamon, 8 offered to depute to A that portion of his work which 
-was within his part of the county. He accepted, procured a com- 
pass and chain, studied Flint, and Gibson a little, and went at it. 
This procured bread, and kept soul and body together. The elec- 
tion of 1834 came, and he was then elected to the Legislature by 
the highest vote cast for any candidate. Major John T. Stuart, then 
in full practice of the law, was also elected. During the canvass, 
in a private conversation he encouraged A. [to] study law. After 
the election he borrowed books of Stuart, took them home with 
him, and went at it in good earnest. He studied with nobody. He 
still mixed in the surveying to pay board and clothing bills. When 
the Legislature met, the law books were dropped, but were taken 
up again at the end of the session. He was re-elected in 1836, 1838, 
and 1840. In the autumn of 1836 he obtained a law licence, and 
on April 15, 1837 removed to Springfield, and commenced the 
practice, his old friend, Stuart taking him into partnership. March 
3rd. 1837, by a protest entered upon the Ills. House Journal of 
that date, at pages 817, 818, A. with Dan Stone, another repre- 
sentative of Sangamon, briefly defined his position on the slavery 
question; and so far as it goes, it was then the same that it is now. 
The protest is as follows (Here insert it) 9 In 1838, & 1840 Mr. L's 
party in the Legislature voted for him as Speaker; but being in the 
minority, he was not elected. After 1840 he declined a re-election 
to the Legislature. He was on the Harrison electoral ticket in 1 840, 
and on that of Clay in 1844, and spent much time and labor in 
both those canvasses. In Nov. 1842 he was married to Mary, 
daughter of Robert S. Todd, of Lexington, Kentucky. They have 
three living children, all sons one born in 1843, one in 1850, and 
one in 1853. They lost one, who was born in 1846. In 1846, he was 
elected to the lower House of Congress, and served one term only, 

7 William F. Berry. & John Calhoun. 

9 Vide supra. March 3, 1837. 

[65] 



jr IT 3\r E, 1860 

commencing in Dec. 1847 and ending with the inaugeration of 
Gen. Taylor, in March 1849. All the battles of the Mexican war 
had been fought before Mr. L. took his seat in congress, but the 
American army was still in Mexico, and the treaty of peace was 
not fully and formally ratified till the June afterwards. Much has 
been said of his course in Congress in regard to this war. A careful 
examination of the Journals and Congressional Globe shows, that 
he voted for all the supply measures which came up, and for all the 
measures in any way favorable to the officers, soldiers, and their 
families, who conducted the war through; with this exception that 
some of these measures passed without yeas and nays, leaving no 
record as to how particular men voted. The Journals and Globe 
also show him voting that the war was unnecessarily and unconsti- 
tutionally begun by the President of the United States. This is the 
language of Mr. Ashmun's amendment, for which Mr. L. and 
nearly or quite all, other whigs of the H. R. voted. 

Mr. L's reasons for the opinion expressed by this vote were 
briefly that the President had sent Genl. Taylor into an inhabited 
part of the country belonging to Mexico, and not to the U.S. and 
thereby had provoked the first act of hostility in fact the com- 
mencement of the war; that the place, being the country border- 
ing on the East bank of the Rio Grande, was inhabited by native 
Mexicans, born there under the Mexican government; and had 
never submitted to, nor been conquered by Texas, or the U.S. nor 
transferred to either by treaty that although Texas claimed the 
Rio Grande as her boundary, Mexico had never recognized it, the 
people on the ground had never recognized it, and neither Texas 
nor the U.S. had ever enforced it that there was a broad desert 
between that, and the country over which Texas had actual con- 
trol that the country where hostilities commenced, having once 
belonged to Mexico, must remain so, until it was somehow legally 
transferred, which had never been done. 

Mr. L. thought the act of sending an armed force among the 
Mexicans, was unnecessary, inasmuch as Mexico was in no way 
molesting, or menacing the U.S. or the people thereof; and that it 
was unconstitutional., because the power of levying war is vested 
in Congress, and not in the President. He thought the principal 
motive for the act, was to divert public attention from the surren- 
der of "Fifty-four, forty, or fight" to Great Brittain, on the Oregon 
boundary question. 

Mr. L. was not a candidate for re-election. This was determined 
upon, and declared before he went to Washington, in accordance 
with an understanding among whig friends, by which Col, Hardin, 

[66] 



JUNE, i860 

and Col. Baker had each previously served a single term in the 
same District. 10 

In 1 848, during his term in congress, he advocated Gen. Taylor's 
nomination for the Presidency, in opposition to all others, and also 
took an active part for his election, after his nomination speak- 
ing a few times in Maryland, near Washington, several times in 
Massachusetts, and canvassing quite fully his own district in Illi- 
nois, which was followed by a majority in the district of over 
1500 for Gen. Taylor. 

Upon his return from Congress he went to the practice of the law 
with greater earnestness than ever before. In 1852 he was upon 
the Scott electoral ticket, and did something in the way of can- 
vassing, but owing to the hopelessness of the cause in Illinois, he 
did less than in previous presidential canvasses. 

In 1854, his profession had almost superseded the thought of 
politics in his mind, when the repeal of the Missouri compromise 
aroused him as he had never been before. 

In the autumn of that year he took the stump with no broader 
practical aim or object that [than?] to secure, if possible, the re- 
election of Hon Richard Yates to congress. His speeches at once 
attracted a more marked attention than they had ever before done. 
As the canvass proceeded, he was drawn to different parts of the 
state, outside of Mr. Yates' district. He did not abandon the law, 
but gave his attention, by turns, to that and politics. The State agri- 
cultural fair was at Springfield that year, and Douglas was an- 
nounced to speak there. 

In the canvass of 1856, Mr. L. made over fifty speeches, no one 
of which, so far as he remembers, was put in print. One of them 
was made at Galena, but Mr. L. has no recollection of any part of 
it being printed; nor does he remember whether in that speech he 
said anything about a Supreme court decision. He may have 
spoken upon that subject; and some of the newspapers may have 
reported him as saying what is now ascribed to him; but he thinks 
he could not have expressed himself as represented. 11 

10 The manuscript is asterisked at this point for the insertion of the next 
paragraph, which appears on a separate page. 

11 Vide supra, July 23, 1856. The report of the Galena speech in the Galena 
Weekly N orth-W estern Gazette., July 29, 1856, quotes Lincoln as saying, "The 
Supreme Court of the United States is the tribunal to decide such questions 
[the constitutionality of a law restricting slavery], and we will submit to its 
decisions. . . ." Lincoln may never have seen the Gazette report. His later 
position on the Dred Scott decision was that Republicans should abide by the 
decision until they could get a reversal by the court. Referring to Lincoln's 
earlier speech at Galena, the Democrats construed Lincoln's statement as a 
contradiction of his later position. 

[67] 



To F. A. Wood 1 

F. A. Wood, Esq. Springfield, Ills, 

Dear sir June * l86 

Yours of May 24th. is received. You say you are not a Lincoln 
man; "but still would like to have Mr. L's autograph." Well, here 
it is. Yours with respect A. LINCOLN. 

i ALS ? RPB. Wood's letter is not among the Lincoln Papers, and he has not 
been identified. 

To H. Buck, Jr. 

Form Reply to Request for Autograph 1 

Lieut. H. Buck, Jr Springfield, Ills. 

Dear Sir June 2. 1860 

You request an autograph, and here it is. Yours truly 

A. LI3NTCOL3NT. 

i ALS, CSmH. There is a similar letter of this date to Edward Herrick, Jr. 
(ALS, MH-Nolen Collection), and numerous others of later date. Since the 
wording in such letters is identical, or so similar as to make repetition super- 
fluous, later examples have not been included in the body of The Collected 
Works, but each will be found listed in the chronological index to these vol- 



To Joseph C. Abbott 1 

Joseph C. Abbott, Esq Springfield, Ills. June 4. 1860 

My dear Sir: Yours of the 22nd. was duly received; but, till 
now, I have not found leisure to so much as acknowledge the re- 
ceipt of it. Of course I very well remember you; and I shall be 
pleased to hear from you at any time. Yours very truly 

A. 



1 ALS, CSmH. Joseph C. Abbott was editor of the Boston Atlas and Bee. His 
letter of May 22 is not in the Lincoln Papers. 

To George Ashmun 1 

Hon: George Ashmun Springfield, Ills. June 4 1860 

My dear Sir It seems as if the question whether my first name 
is "Abraham" or "Abram" will never be settled. It is "Abraham" 
and if the letter of acceptance is not yet in print, you may, if you 
think fit, have my signature thereto printed "Abraham Lincoln." 
Exercise your own judgment about this. Yours as ever, 

A. 

[68] 



JTU1STE 4, i860 

1 AL-F, ISLtA. The present location of the original letter is not known. The 
facsimile, printed from an electrotype plate some years ago, does not include 
the close and signature, but earlier printings [Tarbell (Appendix), p, 338; NH, 
VI, 38] have been followed By accident this letter got into print before the 
official letter of acceptance. Ashmun wrote in explanation on June 18, that the 
official letters had been set in type awaiting Hamlin's reply and that upon re- 
ceiving Lincoln's note of June 4 he had called at the newspaper office to author- 
ize the change in the full name, leaving the note for an editor who wished an 
autograph The senior editor, returning in the absence of his colleague and 
seeing the letter, had assumed it was to be published (DL.C-R.TL) . 

To William A. Buckingham 1 

Springfield, Illinois, 
Hon. Wm. A. Buckingham June 4, 1860. 

My Dear Sir: Your kind letter of congratulation was duly re- 
ceived, and I beg you will believe that necessity alone has delayed 
the acknowledgement of its receipt so long. I am truly glad to learn 
that you have recovered your voice and that your general health 
is better. 

Please present my respects to Mrs. B. and believe me. Very truly 
yours, A. LiisrcorjNT 

1 Tracy, p. 152. Governor Buckingham of Connecticut wrote a brief letter of 
congratulation and closed with the comment that he was a much better man 
than "when you were here and have fully recovered my voice" (DLC-RTL). 

To John Eddy 1 

John Eddy, Esq Springfield, His. 

My dear Sir: June 4. 1860 

Your very gratifying letter of the agth. ult; and although you 
considerately I [.sic] say I need not answer it, I will at least ac- 
knowledge it's receipt. 

Present my respects to Mr. James, 2 to all friends, and to "Little 
Rhoda" generally. Yours very truly A. LiisrcoLisr 

1 ALS, The Rosenbach Company, Philadelphia and New York. Lincoln had 
met John Eddy of Providence, Bhode Island, during his visit of February 28. 
Eddy's letter of May 29 is not in the Lincoln Papers, but there are later ones. 

2 Charles T. James of Providence, owner of cotton mills and a member of the 
U.S. Senate 1851-1857, was Eddy's brother-in-law. 

To Samuel Haycraft 1 

PRIVATE 

Hon. Saml. Haycraft. Springfield, Ills. June 4, 1860 

Dear Sir: Your second letter, dated May sist. is received. You 
suggest that a visit to the place of my nativity might he pleasant 

[69] 



JUNE 4, 1860 

to me. Indeed it would. But would it be safe? Would not the 
people Lynch me? 

The place on Knob Creek, mentioned by Mr. Read, 2 I remember 
very well; but I was not born there. As my parents have told me, 
I was born on Nolin, very much nearer Hodgin's-Mill than the 
Knob Creek place is. My earliest recollection, however, is of the 
Knob Creek place. 

Like yourself I belonged to the whig party from it's origin to it's 
close. I never belonged to the American party organization; nor 
ever to a party called a Union party; though I hope I neither am, 
or ever have been, less devoted to the Union than yourself, or any 
other patriotic man. 

It may not be altogether without interest to let you know that 
my wife is a daughter of the late Robert S. Todd, of Lexington Ky 
and that a half sister 3 of hers is the wif e of Ben. Hardin Helm, 
born and raised at your town, but residing at Louisville now, as I 
believe. Yours very truly A. LINCOLN. 

1 ALS, CSmH. Haycraft's letter of May 31 is not in the Lincoln Papers. 

2 In his letter of August 19, Haycraft mentions showing Lincoln's letter to 
W. B. Read, probably the same man (DLC-RTL) . 3 Emilie Todd. 

To Mordecai Mobley 1 

Major M. Mobley Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir. June 4. 1860 

Your kind letter of May 3oth. is received. I can not answer all 
I am receiving; but I can do no less than acknowledge the receipt 
of one from an old friend like yourself. Present my respects to 
Mrs. Mobley, & believe me. Sincerely your friend A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, owned by Mrs. R. M. LaDue, Sioux City, Iowa. 

To Charles E. Troutman 1 

Chas. E. Troutman, Esq Springfield, Ills. June 4. 1860 

Dear Sir The Washington Agricultural Litterary Society of the 
Farm School, Pennsylvania, will please accept my thanks for the 
honor done me in electing me an honorary member of the same. 
Very Respectfully A. 



PSt. Charles E. Troutman was a member of the first class to enter 
Farmer's High School in 1859 and graduated in 1861. In 1862 the name of the 
school was changed to the Agricultural College of Pennsylvania and in 1874 it 
became Pennsylvania State College. President James Buchanan was also made 
an honorary member of the Washington Agricultural Literary Society. 

[70] 



To Digby V. Bell 1 

Judge D. V. Bell: Springfield, 111., 

My dear Sir: June 5, 1860. 

The chair which you designate as the "Chair of State," is duly 
at hand and gratefully accepted. In view of what it symbolizes, 
might it not be called the "Chair of State and the Union of 
States?" The conception of the maker is a pretty, a patriotic, and 
a national one. 

Allow me to thank both you and him much, for the chair, and 
more for the sentiment which pervades the structure. Your obedi- 
ent servant, A. 



1 Illinois State Journal, June 11, 1860. According to Bell's presentation letter, 
also printed in the Journal, the chair had been made by J. D. Meese of Osseo, 
Michigan, expressly "for the person who should be nominated as a candidate 
... by the National Republican Convention." It consisted of "thirty-four dif- 
ferent kinds of wood . . . symbolizing the union of the several States, including 
Kansas." During the convention the chair occupied a prominent place on the 
platform and at the close was turned over to Bell for delivery. The Chicago Di- 
rectory for 1860 lists Bell as professor of commercial science at the University 
of Chicago. 

To Lyman TrumbulP 

Hon. L. Trumbull Springfield, Ills. June 5, 1860 

My dear Sir: Yours of May 31, inclosing Judge Read's letter, is 
received. 

1 see by the papers this morning, that Mr, Fillmore refuses to 
go -with us. "What do the New-Yorkers at Washington think of this? 
Gov. Reeder 2 was here last evening direct from Pennsylvania. He 
is entirely confident of that state, and of the general result. I do 
not remember to have heard Gen. Cameron's opinion of Penn. 
Weed was here, and saw me; but he showed no signs whatever of 
the intriguer. He asked for nothing; and said N.Y. is safe, without 
condition. 

Remembering that Peter denied his Lord with an oath, after 
most solemnly protesting that he never would, I will not swear I 
will make no committals; but I do think I will not. 

Write me often. I look with great interest for your letters now. 
Y"ours as ever, A. LiisrcoL-isr 

* ALS, CSmH. Trumbull's letter of May 31 reported that Benjamin F. Wade 
vould speak for Lincoln, that Seward had returned to Washington looking and 
alking right, and that some Republicans were disturbed by reports that Thur- 
ow Weed had talked with Lincoln. Trumbull enclosed a letter from John M. 
\ead of Pennsylvania, which described prospects as good (DLORTL). 

2 Andrew H. Reeder of Kansas had returned to Easton, Pennsylvania, to prac- 
ice law. 

[71] 



To William M. Dickson 1 

Hon: W. M. Dickson. Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: J ne 7- 1860 

Your telegraphic despatch, the day of the nomination, was re- 
ceived; as also was, in due course, your kind letter of May 2ist. 
with Cousin Annie's note at the end of it. 2 

I have just now received a letter from Cincinnati, of which the 
f ollowing is a copy. 

"Hon. A. Lincoln Cincinnati, June 5. 1860 

Dr. Sir: We are extremely sorry to be under the necessity of 
calling your attention to the inclosed bill during your sojourn at 
the "Burnet" in Sept. last; but it appears there is no remedy left 
us other than to advise you of it's never having been paid. We re- 
lied upon the Republican committee, but as yet have not been able 
to find any one being willing to take the responsibility of paying 
same consequently advise you in the premises. Very Respy. 
Yours, Johnson, Saunders & Co["] 

The inclosed bill is as follows: 

"Burnet House 

Cincinnati, Sept. 19 1859 
Hon: A. Lincoln 

To Johnson, Saunders & Co. Dr. 

Board & Parlor self & family 37-5 

Extra Suppers. 3.50. Wines, Liquors & cigars 7.50. i i.oo 
Occupancy of room No. 15. committee. 5*oo 



$53-50" 

Now this may be right, but I have a slight suspicion of it, for 
two or three reasons. First, when I left, I called at the office of the 
Hotel, and was there distinctly told the bill "was settled" "was all 
right" or words to that effect. Secondly, it seems a little steep that 
"Board & parlor["] from Saturday 7*4 P-M. to Monday 10% A.M. 
for a man woman and one small child, should be $37.50. Thirdly, 
we had no extra suppers, unless having tea at our room the first 
evening, was such. We were in the house over the time of five 
meals, three only of which we took in the house. We did not once 
dine in the house. As to wines, liquors & cigars, we had none 
absolutely none. These last may have been in room 15, by order 
of Committee, but I do not recollect them at all. 

Please look into this, and write me. I can and will pay it if it is 

[72] 



JUJNTE Q, i860 

right; but I do not wish to be "diddled !["] Please do what you do 
quietly, having no fuss about it. 3 Yours very truly A. 



1 ALS-P, ISLA. Dickson's letter of congratulations enclosed clippings from 
the Cincinnati Gazette and warned Lincoln to beware of Ohio politicians. 

2 Dickson's wife, who was Mrs. Lincoln's cousin. 

3 See Lincoln to Dickson, June 15, infra. 



Endorsement: Recommendation for Pardon 
of Emanuel Fowler 1 

Believing that Judge Emerson knows what is right in this case, I 
join in the recommendation he makes. A. LIISTCOLIN* 

June 8 1860 

1 AES, I-Ar. Lincoln's endorsement follows the endorsement of Judge Charles 
Emerson. Governor John "Wood, who had succeeded to the governorship upon 
the death of William H. Bissell, March 18, 1860, wrote Secretary of State 
Ozias M. Hatch on June 10, 1860, granting the pardon (ALS, I-Ar). 



To John A. Jones 1 

J. A. Jones, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: June 8, 1860 

I can only find time, just now, to gratefully acknowledge the 
receipt of your kind congratulatory note. Your friend, as ever 

A. LfI3NTCOL3NT 

1 ALS, owned by Mrs. Roy W. Ide, Springfield, Illinois. John A. Jones was an 
attorney at Tremont, Illinois. 



To James E. Harvey 1 

Fames E. Harvey, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

VEy dear Sir: June 9. 1860 

Your very acceptable letter of the 5th. is received; and I repeat 
vhat I said before, that I am glad to have one from you as often 
is you can conveniently write. Yours truly A. 



1 ALS, PHi. A native South Carolinian who had made a name in the North 
s editor of the Philadelphia North American and United States Gazette and 
orrespondent of the New York Tribune, James E. Harvey was appointed by 
oncoln in 1861 as minister to Portugal. His letters (May 21, 27, and June 5) 
Dntain reports on politics in Pennsylvania and general political advice (DLC- 
.TL). Lincoln's letter to Harvey of May 31 is presumably not extant. 

[73] 



To Charles Lanman 1 

Charles Lanman Esq Springfield, Ills. June 9. 1860 

My dear Sir: Yours of the 4th. is duly received; and I shall 

gratefully accept the book 2 when it arrives, as it has not yet done. 

I already have a copy, which I purchased near a year ago, and 

which I have found both interesting and valuable. 

I thank you for both your letter and the book, and shall be 

pleased to meet you at any time. Yours respectfully 

A. 



* ALS, CSmH. Charles Lanman of Monroe, Michigan, was a newspaper man 
and writer who later served as librarian of the House of Representatives and 
librarian of the War Department. His letter of June 4 is not in the Lincoln 
Papers. 

2 Probably Lanman's Dictionary of the United States Congress (1859). 



To Mrs. Deziah Vance 1 

Mrs. Deziah Vance Springfield, 

Madam June 9, 1860 

Your letter of June 5th. is received. I have no money collected 
by me for Mr. Vance, and I had ceased trying to collect any for 
him long before his death. You speak of my letters to Mr. Vance; 
and if I remember, they will show that the charge of Mr. Vance's 
claim here was transferred to Mr. W. H. Herndon. I think his 
claim was against a man, or men, by the name of Vannaeter. I 
never keep any body's money, which I collect, an hour longer than 
I can find a chance to turn it over to him. If you doubt this, get 
some of the busy bodies who are imposing on you in this matter, 
to find somebody who will swear he paid me money for Mr. Vance. 
If there is any such man he can be found. 

If, as you say, Mr. Trimble spoke to me, and I gave him no sat- 
isfaction, it was because the truth was not satisfactory. Let Mr. 
Trimble or any one else come here and see the man or men, of 
whom they or you, think I received money for Mr. Vance, and 
learn of them how the truth is. I have no papers in my hands, be- 
longing to Mr. Vance. I do not certainly know, but my opinion is 
that nothing can be got on those old claims, or that old claim of 
Mr. Vance. Yours &c A. 



1 ALS, owned by William H. Townsend, Lexington, Kentucky. Since Mrs. 
Vance's letter of June 5 is not in the Lincoln Papers, it is not possible to clarify 
entirely the matter about which she wrote, but it probably concerned claims 
similar to those about which Lincoln wrote to her husband, John W. Vance, 
on July 7, 1844 (q.v., supra). 



[74] 



To J. Mason Haight 1 

PRIVATE & CONFIDENTIAL. 

J. Mason Haight, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir June 11. 1860 

I think it would be improper for me to write, or say anything to, 
or for, the public, upon the subject of which you inquire. I there- 
fore wish the letter I do write to be held as strictly confidential. 
Having kept house sixteen years, and having never held the "cup" 
to the lips of my friends then, my judgment was that I should not, 
in my new position, change my habit in this respect. What actual- 
ly occurred upon the occasion of the Committee visiting me, I 
think it would be better for others to say Yours Respectfully 

A. 



1 ALS-F, ISLA. John Mason Haight, a newspaper man at Madison, Wiscon- 
sin, was an active member of the temperance society named Good Templars. 
His letter to Lincoln is not in the Lincoln Papers. The facsimile of Lincoln's 
reply was first reproduced in the New York Voice, a prohibition publication, 
on October 10, 1889, and the Chicago Voice., reproduced it a few days later on 
October 16. 



To J. E. Tilton 1 

To J. E. Tilton. Springfield, 111., 

Boston. June 11, 1860. 

Dear Sir: I have received your note . . . and also the 
book. . . . 

I have not yet had time to examine the book, but when I shall 
have done so, I probably shall present it it \sic\ to the younger 
Lincoln, as you request. Yours truly A. LINCOLN. 

1 Tracy, pp. 154-55. In the absence of Lincoln's original letter, only the in- 
complete text from Tracy is available. J. E. Tilton and Company were pub- 
lishers at Boston, Massachusetts. Since their letter is not in the Lincoln Papers 
the book cannot be positively identified, but letters from Tilton (March 4 and 
March 23, 1864) offering complimentary copies of John T. Trowbridge's 
Cudjo's Cave warrants the assumption that it was one of the same author's pop- 
ular stories for boys. 



Memorandum Concerning His Birthplace 1 

June 14, 1860 

I was born Feb. 12, 1809 in then Hardin county Kentucky, at 
i point within the now recently formed county of Larue, a mile, 
>r a mile & a half from where Hodgin'sville now is. My parents 

[75] 



JXJJNTE 14, i860 

being dead and my own memory not serving, I know no means of 
identifying the precise locality. It was on Nolin Creek. 
June 14. 1860. A - 

3-ADS-F, Allen T. Rice, ed., Reminiscences of Abraham Lincoln (1888), p. 
607. According to the artist Thomas Hicks, who had painted Lincoln's portrait 
in June, 1860, the memorandum was jotted down at his request as he was 
leaving Springfield. 

To Charles Sumner 1 

Hon. C. Sumner Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: June 14. 1860 

Your note of the 8th. , and the copy of your recent speech, are 
received; and for both of which, please accept my thanks. I have 
not yet found time to peruse the speech; but I anticipate much 
both of pleasure, and instruction from it. Your Obt. Servt, 

A. 



1 ALS, CSmH. Sumner presumably enclosed a copy of his speech in the Sen- 
ate, June 4, "The Barbarism of Slavery," but there is no copy with his letter 
of June 8. He describes the speech as an endeavor "to expose the true character 
of the assumptions now made by the Slave-masters" (DLC-RTL). 

To Jasper E. Brady 1 

Hon. J. E. Brady Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: June 15, 1860 

Your very kind letter of the /th was duly received; and, until 
receiving it, I do not remember to have known of your being lo- 
cated at Pittsburgh. Your kind remembrance of me gratifies me, 
as well as the flattering prospect which you give of the old "Key 
Stone." 

I shall be much pleased to hear from you again. Very truly your 
friend, A. LINCOLN. 

1 Hertz, II, 778. Brady was a Whig member of the House of Representatives 
with Lincoln in 1847-1849 who afterwards practiced law at Pittsburgh and be- 
came a clerk in the Paymaster General's Office 1861-1869. His letter of June 7 
is not in the Lincoln Papers. 



To William M. Dickson 1 

Hon: W. M. Dickson Springfield, His. 

My dear Sir June 15 . l86o 

Yours inclosing receipt of "Burnet House" is received; and I sin- 
cerely thank you for your attention to this business. Let it stand 

[76] 



jrui^E 17, 1860 

as it is for the present, with the distinct understanding that you 
are not to ultimately lose the money. 

Give my love to Cousin Annie. Yours very truly 

A. 



1 ALS, CSmH. Dickson's letter of June 9, replying to Lincoln's of June 7, supra^ 
enclosed a receipt made out in Lincoln's name, and related the following: "It 
seems that Messrs. Corwine & Eggleston [Richard M. Corwine and Benjamin 
Eggleston, members of the Ohio State Republican Committee] ordered an extra 
parlor and bed room . . . dined or supped with you and they ordered the 
liquor and cigars for the musicians, the extra suppers were for some of them. 
. . . Now the best course is to have it paid at once without a word so I have 
paid it, .... but dont you send me any money whatever. At a proper time 
and quietly some of my particular friends, republicans will share the matter 
with me. For the honor of our city dont send me the money. I would not 
have it said that we have invited you here & then made you pay the expenses 
not only of yourself but of the committee too. . . ." (DLC-RTL). 



To John L. Scripps 1 

John L. Scripps, Esq. Springfield, 

My dear Sir June 16. 1860 

In the Peoria speech of 1854, I have said the prohibition of slav- 
ery in the N.W. Territory "was made a condition in the Virginia 
leed of cession. That is an error. Such prohibition is not a condi- 
ion of the deed; and in any reprint of the speech, the text should 
>e preserved, but there should be a note stating the error. Yours 
ruly A. 



1 ALS, IHi. In his letter of June 8, Scripps said he 'was working hard on 
is biography of Lincoln, but no mention of reprinting the Peoria speech is 
iade in any of his letters (June 2, 8, and 20) in the Lincoln Papers (DLC~ 
TL). 



To Elihu B. Washburne 1 

[on. E. B. Washburne Springfield, Ills, 

ly dear Sir: June 17. 1860 

This will barely reach you before your leaving for the West; 
id I write it merely to say I received yours of the 13th.; that I 
cpect to be at home all summer; and that I shall be glad to see 
>u as soon as convenient to yourself. Yours very truly 

A. LrisrcoLiNr 

l ALS, owned by Hempstead Washburne, Chicago, Illinois. Washburne's let- 
of June 13, related that he had "many things, including a hitch in N.Y." 
3ut which he wished to talk to Lincoln, and proposed that he come to Spring- 
Id after his return home (DLC-RTL) . Congress was to adjourn June 25. 

[77] 



To Oran Follett 1 

PRIVATE 

O. Follett, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

Dear Sir: June l8 - l86 

Your long letter of the gth. was received only this morning. I 
write this to acknowledge the receipt of yours; to thank you for 
the interest you take in the cause; and to say that I previously had 
had my attention turned in the same direction. Yours very truly 

A LINCOLN 

1 ALS, OCHP. Oran Follett wrote from Sandusky, Ohio, detailing incidents in 
earlier campaigns which he believed indicated that William H. Seward was 
surrounded by friends who used politics to secure financial advantages to 
themselves (DLC-RTL). 

To Carl Schurz 1 

Carl Schurz, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: June 18. 1860 

Yours of May 22nd. was duly received; and now, on a careful 
re-perusal of it, I am much mortified that I did not attend to it at 
once. I fear I have no sufficient apology. I received it with multi- 
tudes of others, glanced over it too hastily to properly appreciate 
its' importance, laid it by, and it passed from my mind, till Gov. 
Koerner mentioned it to-day. In a general bringing up of my cor- 
respondence, I perhaps should have reached it to-day. 

The main object of the letter time so far as it depended on 
me, is lost. I hope you have gone f orward on your plan without my 
advice. To me it appears an excellent plan; and I have no sufficient 
experience to suggest any improvement of it. I think it would be 
desireable to have the opinion of the National committee upon it, 
if it can be obtained without too much loss of time. 

And now, upon this bad beginning, you must not determine to 
write me no more; for I promise you, that no letter of yours to 
me, shall ever again be neglected. 

I beg you to be assured that your having supported Gov. Seward, 
in preference to myself in the convention, is not even remembered 
by me for any practical purpose, or the slightest u[n] pleasant feel- 
ing. I go not back of the convention, to make distinctions among 
its' members; and, to the extent of our limited acquaintance, no 
man stands nearer my heart than yourself. Very truly your friend 

A. 



1 ALS-P, ISLA. Schurz had written as a member of the National Republican 
Committee in charge of the foreign department, proposing a list of all "Ger- 



[78] 



JUNE ig, i860 

mans, Norwegians, Hollanders, etc. who can serve our cause in the way of 
public speaking. . . ." His plan was to organize them into squads to send to 
doubtful states, in the belief that the foreign vote of 1856 could be doubled in 
the North, and he wished to consult with Lincoln before leaving for Pennsyl- 
vania during the first or second week in June (DLC-RTL). 

To Richard W. Thompson 1 

PRIVATE 

Hon: R. W. Thompson: Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: June 18. 1860 

Your long letter of the lath, is just received, and read. I write 
this to thank you for it; and to say I would lite for you to converse 
freely with Hon: Henry Winter Davis. 2 And lest he be compro- 
mitted, by inference from this, let me say that he and I never met, 
or corresponded. Very truly your friend. A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, InFtwL. Thompson's letter of June 12, in reply to Lincoln's non-ex- 
tant letter of May 26, expressed gratification at Lincoln's nomination and gave 
the opinion in regard to running a Bell ticket in Indiana that "We should by 
holding off in the doubtful states let you carry them. . . . You must not infer 
from the above that I shall vote for you, although if it should turn out that 
we have no electoral ticket . . . that I may do so is possible." (DLC-RTL). 

2 Henry Winter Davis, a cousin of Lincoln's friend David Davis, was Re- 
publican representative in Congress from Baltimore, Maryland. A former 
Know-Nothing, and earlier a Whig, his Southern extraction as well as his 
marked ability gave him a considerable following and influence in the border 
states. 

Endorsement: James W. Somers to Lincoln 1 

[June 19, 1860] 

Just got home and found this letter. You are abundently wel- 
come to use my name by way of reference; and I wish you great 
success besides. Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

1 AES-F, Henry C. Whitney, The Lincoln Autographic Album [0.1891], p. 
43. Apparently Lincoln wrote the endorsement on Somers' letter of June 10 
and returned it. Somers' letter of June 22 (DLC-B.TL) thanks Lincoln for 
replying to a letter of June 10. 

To Samuel Galloway 1 

Especially Confidential 

Hon: Saml. Galloway: Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir June 19, 1860 

Your very kind letter of the i5th. is received. Messrs. Follett, 
Foster & Go's Life of me is not by my authority; and I have scarce- 
ly been so much astounded by anything, as by their public an- 

[79] 



JTUISTE 19, i860 

nouncement that it is authorized by me. They have fallen into 
some strange misunderstanding. I certainly knew they contem- 
plated publishing a biography, and I certainly did not object to 
their doing so, upon their oivn responsibility. I even took pains to 
facilitate them. But, at the same time, I made myself tiresome, if 
not hoarse, with repeating to Mr. Howard, their only agent seen 
by me, my protest that I authorized nothing would be responsible 
for nothing. How, they could so misunderstand me, passes com- 
prehension. As a matter, wholly my oivn, I would authorize no 
biography, without time, and opertunity to carefully examine 
and consider every word of it; and, in this case, in the nature of 
things, I can have no such time and opertunity. But, in my present 
position, when, by the lessons of the past, and the united voice of 
all discreet friends, I am neither [to] write or speak a word for the 
public, how dare I to send forth, by my authority, a volume of 
hundreds of pages, for adversaries to make points upon without 
end. Were I to do so, the convention would have a right to re- 
assemble, and substitute another name for mine. 

For these reasons, I would not look at the proof sheets. I am 
determined to maintain the position of truly saying I never saw 
the proof sheets, or any part of their work, before it's publication. 

Now, do not mistake me. I feel great kindness for Messrs. F. F. 
& Co do not think they have intentionally done wrong. There 
may be nothing wrong in their proposed book. I sincerely hope 
there will not. I barely suggest that you, or any of the friends 
there, on the party account, look it over, & exclude -what you may 
think would embarrass the party bearing in mind, at all times, 
that I authorize nothing will be responsible for nothing. Your 
friend, as ever A. 



1 ALS, IHi. Galloway had suggested that proof sheets of the biography be- 
ing published by Follett, Foster, and Company should be looked over by some 
of Lincoln's friends because James Q. Howard was too radical in his anti-slav- 
ery views and might possibly wnte something offensive to conservative Re- 
publicans (DLC-RTL). Howard had visited Springfield in May following Lin- 
coln's nomination, to collect material for the biography which William Dean 
Howells would write, but in addition to the Howells book the publishers de- 
cided to issue a biography by Howard. 

To Joshua R. Giddings 1 

Hon. J. R. Giddings. Springfield, Ills. June 26. 1860. 

My dear Sir Yours of June igth was received in due course, 
and its receipt would have been sooner acknowledged but for ill- 
ness in my family. The suggestions you make are very important, 

[80] 



JULY 4, i860 

and are duly appreciated by me. If I fail, it will be for lack of 
ability., and not of purpose. 

Your note, sent by Mr. Tuck, was received, and answered; 2 but 
as you make no mention of my answer, I fear you did not receive 
it. 

Mrs. L. joins me in remembrances and good wishes for you. 
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN 

i Copy, DLC-HW. Giddings letter of June 19 suggested that Lincoln follow 
the example set by John Quincy Adams in not answering any questions upon 
which he was expected to act as President until he was elected, and further 
that he should say to applicants for office that at the proper time he would 
select his cabinet and leave each secretary responsible for appointments in his 
department (DLC-RTL). 2 Vide supra, May ai. 

To WiUiam C. Bryant 1 

Mr. Wm. C. Bryant: Springfield, Ills. June 28. 1860 

My dear Sir: Please accept ray thanks for the honor done me by 
your kind letter of the 1 6th. I appreciate the danger against which 
you would guard me; nor am I wanting in the purpose to avoid it. 
I thank you for the additional strength your words give me, to 
maintain that purpose. Your friend & servant A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, Bryant MSS. in custody of Conrad G. Goddard, Roslyn, Long Island, 
New York Bryant's letter warned Lincoln against politicians interested only 
in their own advancement and, reminding him that the candidate who makes 
pledges most cautiously has the greatest chance for success, suggested that Lin- 
coln make no speeches and write no letters for publication (DLC-RTL). 

Tb Whom It May Concern: For David L. Phillips 1 

Whom it may concern Springfield, Ills. July 2. 1860 

The bearer of this, Mr. D. L. Phillips, is one of our most active 
and efficient republicans in Illinois. He is doing good service in our 
cause; and will ask nothing not needed, and misapply nothing re- 
ceived by him. Yours &c A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS-F, Los Angeles Times, February 12, 1931. 

To Anson G. Henry 1 

My dear Doctor: Springfield, Ills. July 4, 1860 

Your very agreeable letter of May 15th. was received three days 
ago. We are just now receiving the first sprinkling of your Oregon 
election returns not enough, I think, to indicate the result. We 
should be too happy if both Logan and Baker should triumph. 2 

[81] 



JTULY i o, 1860 

Long before this you have learned who was nominated at Chi- 
cago. We know not what a day may bring forth; but, to-day, it 
looks as if the Chicago ticket will be elected. I think the chances 
were more than equal that we could have beaten the Democracy 
united. Divided, as it is, it's chance appears indeed very slim. But 
great is Democracy in resources; and it may yet give it's fortunes 
a turn. It is under great temptation to do something; but what can 
it do which was not thought of, and found impracticable, at 
Charleston and Baltimore?. The signs now are that Douglas and 
Breckenridge will each have a ticket in every state. They are 
driven to this to keep up their bombastic claims of nationality - y and 
to avoid the charge of sectionalism which they have so much 
lavished upon us. 

It is an amusing fact, after all Douglas has said about national- 
ity., and sectionalism, that I had more votes from the Southern 
section at Chicago, than he had at Baltimore! In fact, there was 
more of the Southern section represented at Chicago, than in the 
Douglas rump concern at Baltimore!! 

Our boy, 3 in his tenth year, (the baby when you left) has just 
had a hard and tedious spell of scarlet-fever; and he is not yet be- 
yond all danger. I have a head-ache, and a sore throat upon me 
now, inducing me to suspect that I have an inferior type of the 
same thing. 

Our eldest boy, Bob, has been away from us nearly a year at 
school, and will enter Harvard University this month. He promises 
very well, considering we never controlled him much. 

Write again when you receive this. Mary joins in sending our 
kindest regards to Mrs. H. yourself, and all the family. Your 
friend, as ever A. 



1 ALS-P, ISLA. 

2 Edward D. Baker, candidate for the U.S. Senate, and David Logan (son of 
Stephen T. Logan), who was a candidate for the U.S. House of Representatives. 

3 William Wallace Lincoln. 

To Richard W. Thompson 1 

PRIVATE 

Hon. R. W. Thompson: Springfield, Ills, 

Dear Sir: j u l y 1(X l86o 

Yours of the 6th. is received, and for which I thank you. I write 
this to acknowledge the receipt of it, and to say I take time (only 
a little) before answering the main matter. 

If my record would hurt any, there is no hope that it will be 

[82] 



JTULY 16, 1860 

over-looked; so that if friends can help any with it, they may as 
well do so. Of course, due caution and circumspection, "will be used. 

With reference to the same matter, of which you write, I wish 
you would watch Chicago a little. They are getting up a movement 
for the i /th. Inst. I believe a line from you to John Wilson, 2 late 
of the Genl. Land Office (I guess you know him well) would fix 
the matter. 

When I shall have reflected a little, you will hear from me 
again. Yours very truly A. LINCOLN. 

Burn this. 

1 ALS, InFtWL Thompson's letter of July 6 recounted plans of the Indiana 
Constitutional Unionists to run a Bell electoral ticket, which he opposed, and 
said that one of his chief arguments was that Lincoln, if elected, would not 
be "led into ultraism by radical men, but your administration will be national. 
If I could succeed in fixing this influence upon their mind, I should have little 
difficulty." He added that he wished to see Lincoln and * e talk about some things 
that you ought not to write about," but that if he came to Springfield it would 
"get into the papers" (DLC-RTL). Lincoln sent Nicolay to Terre Haute, 
Indiana, to interview- Thompson a few days later. See Lincoln to Thompson 
and instructions to Nicolay, July 16, infra. 

2 John Wilson was appointed commissioner of the General Land Office under 
President Fillmore. 



Instructions for John G. Nicolay 1 

[c. July 16, 1860] 
Ascertain "what he wants. 

On what subjects he would converse with me. 
And the particulars if he will give them. 
Is an interview indispensable? 
Tell him my motto is "Fairness to all," 
But commit me to nothing, 

1 Copy, DLC-Nicolay Papers. The copy is marked "Unpublished MS.," but 
Lincoln's autograph manuscript is not in the Nicolay Papers. Nicolay carried 
the instructions for his interview "with Richard W. Thompson, introducing 
Nicolay, infra., and the letter of July 10, supra. 



To Leonard Swett 1 

Dear Swett: Springfield, Ills. July 16. 1860 

Herewith I return the letters of Messrs: Putnam & Casey. 2 I 
thank you for sending them in the main, they bring good news. 
And yet that matter, mentioned by Mr. Casey, about want of con- 
fidence in their Centrl. Com. pains me. I am afraid there is a germ 
of difficulty in it. Will not the men thus suspected, and treated as 

[83] 



JTULY 6, i860 

proposed, rebel, and make a dangerous explosion? 3 When you 
write Mr. Casey, suggest to him that great caution and delicacy of 
action, is necessary in that matter. 

I would like to see you & the Judge, 4 one or both, about that 
matter of your going to Pa. Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN. 

1 ALS, owned by David Davis, IV, Bloomington, Illinois. 

2 James O. Putnam of Buffalo, New York, and Joseph Casey, representative in 
congress from Pennsylvania, 1849-1851, appointed by Lincoln, Judge of the 
Court of Claims, 1861. Putnam's letter pleased Lincoln so much that he copied 
the following extract and filed it in the envelope of Swett's letter: "They have 
had large meetings; and they begin to feel that 'Old Abe* is a great fellow. This 
opinion I share, as you see. Do you know, Swett, I think him one of the most 
remarkable speakers of English, living? In all that constitutes logical eloquence, 
straight-forwardness, clearness of statement, sincerity that commands your 
admiration and assent, and a compact stren[g]th of argument, he is infinitely 
superior to Douglas, I think. The truth is, I have read every thing I have been 
able to find he has written or said, and the ring of the best metal is in them all 
I dont wonder at your admiration." (DLC-RTL). 

3 The Pennsylvania State Central Committee was controlled by followers of 
Andrew G. Curtin, Republican candidate for governor, and the faction support- 
ing Simon Cameron were suspicious of their loyalty. See Lincoln to John M. 
Pomeroy, August 31, infra. 4 Judge David Davis. 



To Richard W. Thompson 1 

Hon. R. W. Thompson Springfield, Ills., 

My dear Sir: July 16, 1860. 

This introduces my friend, J. G. Nicolay. Converse as freely 

with him as you would with me. Yours truly, A. 



1 Copy, David W. Henry, "Richard Wigginton Thompson," MS , In, The 
original letter was formerly in the Thompson Papers, but has not been located 
among the manuscripts now at The Lincoln National Life Foundation, Fort 
Wayne, Indiana. 



To Hannibal Hamlin 1 

Springfield, Illinois, July 18, 1860, 

My dear Sir: It appears to me that you and I ought to be ac- 
quainted, and accordingly I write this as a sort of introduction of 
myself to you. You first entered the Senate during the single term 
I was a member of the House of Representatives, but I have no 
recollection that we were introduced. I shall be pleased to receive 
a line from you. 

The prospect of Republican success now appears very flattering, 
so far as I can perceive. Do you see anything to the contrary? 
Yours truly, A . 

[84] 



JULY 21, i860 

1 NH, VI, 44. Hamlin replied, July 23, that although he was not sure, his 
recollection "was that they had been formally introduced. He reported that 
Maine would do her whole duty and that New England looked well (DLG- 
RTL). 



To Cassius M. Clay 1 

Hon: Cassius M. Clay: Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: July 20, 1860 

I see by the papers, and also learn from Mr. Nicolay, -who saw 
you at Terre-Haute, that you are filling a list of speaking appoint- 
ments in Indiana. I sincerely thank you for this; and I shall be 
still further obliged if you will, at the close of the tour, drop me 
a line, giving your impression of our prospects in that state. 

Still more will you oblige us if you -will allow us to make a list 
of appointments in our State, commencing, say, at Marshall, in 
Clark county, and thence South and West, along our Wabash and 
Ohio river border. 

In passing, let me say, that at Rockport you will be in the county 
within which I was brought up from my eigth year having 
left Kentucky at that point of my life. Yours very truly 

A. LiisrcoiJNr. 

1 ALS, THaroL. See also Lincoln to Clay, August 10, infra. 

To Abraham Jonas 1 

Confidential 

Hon. A. Jonas: Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir July 21, 1860 

Yours of the 2Oth. is received. I suppose as good, or even better, 
men than I may have been in American, or Know-Nothing lodges; 
but in point of fact, I never was in one, at Quincy, or elsewhere. 
I was never in Quincy but one day and two nights, while Know- 
Nothing lodges were in existence, and you were with me that day 
and both those nights. I had never been there before in my life; 
and never afterwards, till the joint debate with Douglas in 1858. 
It was in 1854, when I spoke in some Hall there, 2 and after the 
speaking, you, with others, took me to an oyster saloon, passed an 
hour there, and you walked with me to, and parted with me at, 
the Quincy-House, quite late at night. I left by stage for Naples 
before day-light in the morning, having come in by the same route, 
after dark, the evening previous to the speaking, when I found 
you waiting at the Quincy House to meet me. A few days after I 

[85] 



JTJLT 21, i860 

was there, Richardson, 3 as I understood, started this same story 
about my having been in a Know-Nothing lodge. When I heard 
of the charge, as I did soon after, I taxed my recollection for some 
incident which could have suggested it; and I remembered that 
on parting with you the last night, I went to the Office of the 
Hotel to take my stage passage for the morning, was told that no 
stage office for that line was kept there, and that I must see the 
driver, before retiring, to insure his calling for me in the morning; 
and a servant was sent with me to find the driver, who after taking 
me a square or two, stopped me, and stepped perhaps a dozen steps 
farther, and in my hearing called to some one, who answered him 
apparantly from the upper part of a building, and promised to call 
with the stage for me at the Quincy House. I returned and went 
to bed; and before day the stage called and took me. This is all. 

That I never was in a Know-Nothing lodge in Quincy, I should 
expect, could be easily proved, by respectable men, who were al- 
ways in the lodges and never saw me there. An affidavit of one 
or two such would put the matter at rest. 

And now, a word of caution. Our adversaries think they can 
gain a point, if they could force me to openly deny this charge, by 
which some degree of offence would be given to the Americans. 
For this reason, it must not publicly appear that I am paying any 
attention to the charge. Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, IHi. Jonas' letter of July 20 (miscataloged under date of July 25, 
DLC-RTL) related that "Isaac N. Morris is engaged in obtaining affadavits 
and certificates of certain Irishmen that they saw you in Quincy come out of a 
Know Nothing Lodge the intention is to send the affadavits to Washington 
for publication. . . ." 

2 Lincoln spoke at Quincy in Kendall's Hall, November i, 1854. Vide supra. 

3 William A. Richardson. 



To William H. Seward 1 

[July 21, 1860] 

I join in the foregoing invitation; and if a compliance with it 
will be no inconvenience to Gov. Seward, I shall be personally 
much gratified to meet him here. A. LirsrcoLisr. 

1 AES, NAuE. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter of Governor John 
Wood and others to Seward, July 21, 1860: 

"We notice this morning [in the Chciago Press and Tribune]^ with pleasure, 
your letter to the Hon Aaron Goodrich of Minnessota, in which you promise to 
address the People of that gallant State, at a future day. 

"On the Eighth day of August- there will be a State Convention, held in 
this city, to nominate a candidate to be elected, to the office of Lieutenant 
Governor- together with a Mass Meeting of the Republicans of this state. We 
anticipate a very large gathering probably as large as any that will be held 

[86] 



JULY 23, i860 

in the state upon that occasion, and we cordially and urgently invite you to 
be present, and address the assembled multitude. 

"We feel assured that you will come, if you possibly can, and request you 
to answer, by telegraph^ addressed to John Wood, this city that you will come, 
so that proper measures may be taken to make all who may attend the meet- 
ing as comfortable as we can." 

Seward spoke in St. Paul on September 18, then went to Kansas. On Oc- 
tober i, he passed through Springfield on his way to Chicago and spoke from 
the platform of the tram to a crowd of two to three thousand (Illinois State 
Journal, October 2, 1860). 

To George C. Latham 1 

My dear George Springfield, Ills. July 22. 1860. 

I have scarcely felt greater pain in my life than on learning 
yesterday from Bob's letter, that you had failed to enter Harvard 
University. And yet there is very little in it, if you will allow no 
feeling of discouragement to seize, and prey upon you. It is a cer- 
tain truth, that you can enter, and graduate in, Harvard Univer- 
sity; and having made the attempt, you must succeed in it. "Must" 
is the word. 

I know not how to aid you, save in the assurance of one of ma- 
ture age, and much severe experience, that you can not fail, if 
you resolutely determine, that you will not. 

The President of the institution, can scarcely be other than a 
kind man; and doubtless he would grant you an interview, and 
point out the readiest way to remove, or overcome, the obstacles 
which have thwarted you. 

In your temporary failure there is no evidence that you may not 
yet be a better scholar, and a more successful man in the great 
struggle of life, than many others, who have entered college more 
easily. 

Again I say let no feeling of discouragement prey upon you, and 
in the end you are sure to succeed. 

"With more than a common interest I subscribe myself Very 
truly your friend, A. LmcoiJN'. 

1 ALS, owned by Mrs. H. S. Dickerman, Springfield, Illinois. George C. 
Latham, who had attended Phillips Exeter Academy with Robert Todd Lincoln, 
was a Springfield boy, the son of Philip C. Latham. 



To Caleb B. Smith 1 

Springfield, [July 23], 1860. 

My dear Sir: Yours of the aoth was duly received, and for 
which I sincerely thank you. From present appearances we might 

[87] 



JULY 27, i860 

succeed in the general result, without Indiana; but with it, failure 
is scarcely possible. Therefore put in your best efforts. I see by the 
despatches that Mr. Clay had a rousing meeting at Vincennes. 
Yours very truly, A - LINCOLN. 

1 NH, VI, 47. The date of this letter in Nicolay and Hay's Complete Works 
(August 10,' 1860) seems to be incorrect. Lincoln's reference to newspaper re- 
ports of Cassius Clay's speech at Vincennes would put the date more than two 
weeks earlier. Smith's letter of July 20 also reports on Clay's Indiana tour 
(DLC-RTL). Although Lincoln's manuscript letter has not been located, auc- 
tion records of its sale (Parke-Bernet Sale 493, November 3, 1943) give the 
date of the letter as July 23, 1860. 

To Francis E. Spinner 1 

Hon. F. E. Spinner. Springfield, Ills. July 27, 1860. 

Dear Six: You will perhaps be pleased, as I have been, to know 
that many good men have tendered me substantially the same ad- 
vice that you do (excepting as to re-election) and that no single 
man of any mark has, so far, tempted me to a contrary course. 
. . . Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN. 

1 Tracy, pp. 156-57. Francis E. Spinner, banker at Mohawk, New York, 
congressman 1855-1861, and later treasurer of the U.S. (1861-1875), wrote 
Lincoln July 23 that administration men were joining the Republicans to as- 
sist in spoils distribution, and warned that Lincoln should even "resist the 
importunities of your own political and personal friends." Such a course would 
"compel your reelection." In a postscript he promised to send Com. Perry's Ex- 
pedition to Japan (1854) and reported that he could also send the "Pacific Rail 
Road Survey Reports" and the "Mexican Boundary Survey Reports" (DLC- 
RTL). See Lincoln to Spinner, September 24, infra. 

To Carl Schurz 1 

Hon. Carl Schurz. Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir July 28. 1860 

By the hand of J. G. Nicolay, whom you know, I send you the 
Scrap-boot, containing the New-Orleans speech you desire. It also 
contains the speeches made at Chicago, St. Louis, and Memphis, 
immediately after the election of 1858. If the Scrap-book will be 
of much further service to you, you can keep it, till oppertunity 
occurs to return it; otherwise, let Mr. Nicolay bring it with him. 
Yours very truly A. 



1 ALS, DLC-Schurz Papers. Schurz Had visited Lincoln on July 24, and 
doubtless expressed his wish for a copy of Douglas' speech at New Orleans. On 
August 22 he wrote Lincoln from New Albany, Indiana, that he had been "for 
about three weeks . . . working the state of Ind. . . ." and that he was return- 
ing the scrapbook (DLC-RTL). 

[88] 



To James O. Putnam 1 

Hon. James O. Putnam Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir July 29. 1860 

I have just read the speech you sent me, with your note of the 
23rd. attached. 2 I do not mean to flatter you when I say it is, in- 
deed, a very excellent one. The manner in which you point out to 
Gov. Hunt that his objections to the election of the Republican 
candidate apply with manifold force to the candidate he would 
elect instead, is truly admirable. 

And now allow me to name one error. John Adams was not 
elected over Jefferson by the H.R; but Jefferson was over Burr. 
Such is my recollection. 3 Yours very truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS-F, New York Times, February 12, 1928. Putnam's note of July 23 is 
not in the Lincoln Papers. 

2 Putnam spoke at Lockport, New York, on July 19, in reply to ex-Governor 
Washington Hunt, who was a Bell supporter. 

3 Putnam wrote Lincoln on September 8 that he had corrected the error in 
the pamphlet edition of his speech. See Lincoln to Putnam, September 13, infra 
(DLC-RTL). 

To Thomas Doney 1 

Thomas Doney, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: July 30, 1860 

The picture (I know not the artistic designation) was duly and 
thankfully received. I consider it a very excellent one; though, 
truth to say, I am a very indifferent judge. 

The receipt of it should have been acknowledged long ago; but 
it had passed from my mind till reminded of it by the letter of 
our friend. Dr. Dodson. 2 Yours very truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, ORB. Thomas Doney was an engraver at Elgin, Illinois. 

2 There is no letter from Dr. Dodson in the Lincoln Papers, but Lincoln prob- 
ably referred to Dr. B. E. Dodson of Dundee, Illinois. 

To Simeon Francis 1 

Friend Francis Springfield, Ills. Aug. 4. 1860 

I have had three letters from you one, a long one, received in 
February; one, telling me of the deputation of Mr. Greely to 
cast the vote of Oregon, in the Chicago convention, received a few 
days before that convention; and one written since you knew the 
result of your Oregon election, received a few days ago. I have not, 
till now, attempted an answer to any of them, because I disliked 

[89] 



AUGUST 6, i860 

to write you a mere note, and because I could not find time to -write 
at length. 

Your brother Allen has returned from California., and, I under- 
stand, intends remaining here. Josiah 2 is running his J. P. court, 
about as when you left. We had a storm here last night which did 
considerable damage, the largest single instance of which, was to 
the Withies. 3 A wall of their brick shop building was thrown in, 
and, it is said destroyed ten thousand dollars worth of carriages. I 
have heard of no personal injury done. 

When you wrote, you had not learned of the doings of the demo- 
cratic convention at Baltimore; but you will be in possession of it 
all long before this reaches you. I hesitate to say it, but it really 
appears now, as if the success of the Republican ticket is inevitable. 
We have no reason to doubt any of the states which voted for 
Fremont. Add to these, Minnesota, Pennsylvania, and New- Jersey, 
and the thing is done. Minnesota is as sure as such a thing can be; 
while the democracy are so divided between Douglas and Brecken- 
ridge in Penn. & N.J. that they are scarcely less sure. Our friends 
are also confident in Indiana and Illinois. I should expect the same 
division would give us a fair chance in Oregon. Write me what you 
think on that point. 

"We were very anxious here for David Logan's election. I think 
I wall write him before long. If you see Col. Baker, 4 give him my 
respects. I do hope he may not be tricked out of what he has fairly 
earned. 

Make my kindest regards to Mrs. Francis; and tell her I both 
hope and believe she is not so unhappy as when I saw her last. 
Your friend, as ever A. 



1 ALS, OrHi. In 1859, Simeon Francis had removed from Springfield to Port- 
land, Oregon, where he published The Oregon Farmer. 
% Josiah Francis, brother of Simeon. 

3 William H. Withey and George Withey, carriage and wagon manufactur- 
ers. 

4 Lincoln's old friend Edward D. Baker. The verso of the last page of Lin- 
coln's letter bears a note by Francis as follows: "Gave this letter to Col. Baker 
to be shown at Salem when the Senator was to be chosen to stop some foolish 
lies in circulation." 

To Simon Cameron 1 

PRIVATE 

Hon. Simon Cameron. Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: Aug. 6. 1860 

Yours of the ist. is duly received, and for which I sincerely 
thank you. Good news, from a reliable source, is always welcome. 

[90] 



AUGUST 8, i860 

Before this reaches you, my very good friend. Judge Davis, 2 will 
have called upon you, and, perhaps, shown you the "scraps" men- 
tioned to you by Mr. Leslie. 3 Nothing about these, must get into 
the news-papers. Yours very truly A. 



1 ALS, DLC-Cameron Papers. Cameron wrote on August i that Pennsylvania 
was safe and needed no help "My young friend, Mr. Lesley, who saw you the 
other day says you showed him your notes of speeches made in 1844, on the 
subject of protection, and his account of them gratifies us, all, very much." 
(DLC-RTX). 2 David Davis. 

3 James Lesley, Jr., of Philadelphia. The "scraps" were the same notes pre- 
served in the Lincoln Papers. Vide supra, December i, 1847. Although Cameron 
refers to them as written in 1844, Lincoln dated them as written between 1846 
and December, 1847. 

Remarks at a Republican Rally, 
Springfield-, Illinois 1 

August 8, 1860 

My Fellow Citizens: I appear among you upon this occasion 
with no intention of making a speech. 

It has been my purpose, since I have been placed in my present 
position, to make no speeches. This assemblage having been drawn 
together at the place of my residence, it appeared to be the wish 
of those constituting this vast assembly to see me; and it is certain- 
ly my wish to see all of you. I appear upon the ground here at this 
time only for the purpose of affording myself the best opportunity 
of seeing you, and enabling you to see me. 

I confess with gratitude, be it understood, that I did not suppose 
my appearance among you would create the tumult which I now 
witness. I am profoundly gratified for this manifestation of your 
feelings. I ana gratified, because it is a tribute such as can be paid 
to no man as a man. It is the evidence that four years from this 
time you will give a like manifestation to the next man who is the 
representative of the truth on the questions that now agitate the 
public. And it is because you will then fight for this cause as you 
do now, or with even greater ardor than now, though I be dead and 
gone. I most profoundly and sincerely thank you. 

Having said this much, allow me now to say that it is my wish 
that you will hear this public discussion by others of our friends 
who are present for the purpose of addressing you, and that you 
will kindly let me be silent. 

1 Illinois State Journal, August 9, 1860. This speech is misdated by Nicolay 
and Hay in the Complete Works (VI, 49) on August 14. The Journal devoted 
more than three columns to the mammoth occasion at the Fair Grounds, head- 
ing the first column "with an elephant bearing in its trunk a banner inscribed 

[91] 



AUGUST 8, i860 

"WE ARE COMING!" and caparisoned in another which announced "CLEAR 
THE TRACK!" _ the first known use of the elephant as symbol of the Repub- 
lican party. Headlines followed "A Political Earthquake'" "THE PRAIRIES 
ON FIRE/FOR LINCOLN!" The rally was described in superlatives. Five 
speakers' stands (other papers said "six") were filled simultaneously. Lincoln's 
arrival on the grounds occasioned a stampede for his carriage, whence he was 
lifted and carried above the crowd to one of the stands. After his brief remarks 
he escaped by stratagem on horseback while the expectant crowd massed 
around the carriage. The Cincinnati Gazette reporter admitted that "Immense 
is the only word that describes to-day's demonstration. . . . The enthusiasm 
was beyond all bounds. ... I never saw so dense and large a crowd. . . . Mr. 
Lincoln's bearing to-day, under such a tribute of personal popularity and ad- 
miration as I have never before seen paid to any human being, more and more 
convinces me of the real greatness of his character. . . ." (Peoria Daily Tran- 
script., August 13, 1860, copied from the Gazette.} 

Endorsement: Buckner S. Morris to John Wood 
Concerning Pardon of Patrick Cunningham 1 

[August 8, 1860] 

I think it is almost always safe to pardon a convict, when, as in 
this case, the Judge before whom he was convicted., recommends it. 

A. 



1 AES, I-Ar. Judge Buckner S. Morris, who had presided over the Lake 
County Circuit Court which convicted one Patrick Cunningham of man- 
slaughter, gave Mary Cunningham, a sister, a letter dated August 7, recom- 
mending pardon. An endorsement on the verso indicates that Mary Cunning- 
ham brought the letter to Springfield in person on August 8, at which time 
she probably secured Lincoln's endorsement also. 

To Cassius M. Clay 1 

Springfield, Illinois, August 10, 1860, 

My dear Sir: Your very kind letter of the 6th was received yes- 
terday. It so happened that our State Central Committee -was in 
session here at the time; and, thinking it proper to do so, I sub- 
mitted the letter to them. They were delighted -with the assurance 
of having your assistance. For what appear good reasons, they, 
however, propose a change in the program, starting you at the 
same place (Marshall in Clark County), and thence northward. 
This change, I suppose, will be agreeable to you, as it will give 
you larger audiences, and much easier travel nearly all being by 
railroad. They will be governed by your time, and when they shall 
have fully designated the places, you will be duly notified. 

As to the inaugural, I have not yet commenced getting it up; 
while it affords me great pleasure to be able to say the cliques have 
not yet commenced upon me. Yours very truly, A. 

[92] 



AUGUST 14, i860 

1 NH, VI, 47-48. In reply to Lincoln's letter of July 20, supra, Clay wrote on 
August 6, that he had been through Southern Indiana and found the Fillmore 
party dissolved, with "our ticket . . . surely winner in Indiana." He agreed 
to speak at Marshall on August 28 and "run on till Sept gth when I must 
return. ... I will advise you in two respects put Andrew Jackson's 'union* 
speech in your inaugural address: and stay clear of all cliques^ His next letter 
of August 12, agrees to the appointments made for him by the Illinois State 
Central Committee (DLC-RTL) . 

To M. B. Miner 1 

M. B. Miner, Esq Springfield, Ills 

Dear Sir Aug. 11. 1860 

Yours of the 7th. -with newspaper slip attached, is received; and 
for which I thank you. Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, laHA. Miner's letter is not in the Lincoln Papers, and he cannot be 
positively identified. It seems probable, however, that Martin B. Miner, an 
attorney at Jerseyville, Illinois, was the man. 

To T. Apolion Cheney 1 

T. A. Cheney, Esq Springfield, Ills., Aug. 14, 1860 

Dear Sir Yours of the loth, is received and for which I thank 
you. I would cheerfully answer your questions in regard to the 
Fugitive Slave law', were it not that I consider it would be both 
imprudent, and contrary to the reasonable expectation of friends 
for me to write, or speak anything upon doctrinal points now. Be- 
sides this, my published speeches contain nearly all I could will- 
ingly say. Justice and fairness to all., is the utmost I have said, or 
will say. Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

1 AL/S-P, ISLA. Cheney's letter of August 10 is not among the Lincoln Pa- 
pers, but his reply of August 19, written from Cherry Creek, New York, in- 
dicates that he was probably an abolitionist. 

Endorsement: David Davis to John Wood 
Concerning Pardon of Thomas Patterson 1 

August 14, i86o 2 

Considering the absence of previous bad character of Patterson 
himself, the necessities of his family, the excellent character of all 
his family connections, and the very numerously signed petition of 
his neighbors, I recommend that he be pardoned at once. 

A. 



1 AES, I-Ar. Judge David Davis* letter to Governor Wood concerning tlie 
pardon of Thomas Patterson of Vermilion County, convicted of manslaughter, 
is dated June 12, 1860. Patterson was pardoned August 30, 860. 

2 This date is not in Lincoln's handwriting. 

[93] 



To George G. Fogg 1 

George G. Fogg, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: Aug. 14. 1860 

According to a printed notice attached to a letter of Gov. Mor- 
gan, 2 I suppose you have been at New- York since the 2 3rd. of July. 
How does it look noiv?" 

I am invited to a horse-show, at Springfield, Mass, beginning, I 
believe, on the 4th. of September. 

Would it help, or hurt., our cause, if I were to go? 

I am not itching to go, and seeking to be advised thereto. Yours 
very truly A. 



1 ALS, owned by Elwin L. Page, Concord, New Hampshire. George G. Fogg, 
a lawyer of Concord, New Hampshire, secretary of the Republican National 
Committee, replied August 18 that a trip to Springfield, Massachusetts, would 
not help (DLC-RTL). 2 Edwin D. Morgan of New York. 

To Samuel Galloway 1 

Hon. Saml. Galloway Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Aug. 14. 1860 

I should be very glad indeed to see you here; but if coming will 
lessen your chance of success in your own election, do not come. 

Mr. Dill Wiegand 2 has not yet presented his letter; but when he 
shall do so, I shall show him the attention you request. Yours very 
truly A. 



1 ALS, IHi. Galloway's letter is not in the Lincoln Papers. Although his per- 
sonal campaign for a seat in Congress was intensive (he was defeated by a 
narrow margin), the Illinois State Journal, October 15, 1860, lists seven speak- 
ing engagements for him in Illinois, October 18-25. 

2 No person of this name has been identified, but the possibility seems to be 
that Lincoln misread Galloway's handwriting for "Dr. H. Wigand," a Chase 
supporter of Springfield, Ohio, who thus signed his name in a letter to Lincoln 
in November, 1860 (DLC-RTL). 

To James E. Harvey 1 

Private. 

James E. Harvey, Esq., Springfield, 111., 

My dear Sir, Aug. 14, 1860. 

Yours of the gth inclosing the Spalding letter, is received. As to 
our uneasy friends in New York, (if there be such) all that can be 
said is "Justice and fairness to all." More than this has not been, 
and can not be, said to any. 

Whether you go to Tennessee must depend upon your own 

[94] 



AUGUST 15, i860 

judgment. I expect to be constantly here; and I shall be much 
pleased to see you at any time. Yours very truly, 

A. 



1 Hertz, II, 782. Neither Harvey's letter of August 9, nor the enclosure of 
Spaldang (Elbridge G. Spaulchng of Buffalo, New York?) is in the Lincoln 
Papers. 

To William Fithian 1 

Dr. Wm. Fithian Springfield, 

My dear Sir, Aug. 15, 1860 

I understand there is trouble in Old Vermilion about it's next 
Representative to the Legislature. I have learned nothing as to the 
grounds of the difficulty; but I will be greatly obliged if you will 
find a way of so adjusting it, that we do not lose that member. To 
lose Trumbull's re-election next winter would be a great disaster. 
Please do not let it fall upon us. I appeal to you because I can to 
no other, with so much confidence. Yours as ever A. 



1 ALS, IHi. There is no reply from Fithian in the Lincoln Papers. Apparent- 
ly the "trouble in Old Vermilion" -was not settled, for Samuel G. Craig, a 
Democrat, 'was elected representative from that county. 

To John B. Fry 1 

Private 

John B. Fry, Esq Springfield, Ills. August 15. 1860 

My dear Sir: Yours of the Qth. inclosing the letter of Hon. John 
M. Botts, was duly received. The latter is herewith returned ac- 
cording to your request. It contains one of the many assurances 
I receive from the South that in no probable event will there be 
any very formidable effort to break up the Union. The people 
of the South have too much of good sense, and good temper, to at- 
tempt the ruin of the government, rather than see it administered 
as it was administered by the men who made it. At least, so I hope 
and believe. 

I thank you both for your own letter, and a sight of that of Mr. 
Botts. Yours, very truly A. LIINTCOLIST 

1 Copy, DLC-Jeremiah S. Black Papers. John B. Fry wrote from New York 
City, reminding Lincoln of his acquaintance in 1846 when he had been in- 
troduced to Lincoln by John J. Hardin. He would campaign for Lincoln in 
Pennsylvania and New York beginning September 10, and enclosed a letter 
which indicated "the wish of the writer [John M. Botts of Virginia who had 
been in Congress with Lincoln] that you may be elected, although situated 
as he is, it would not do for him to say so. . . ." (DLC-RTL). 

[95] 



To George G. Fogg 1 

P RI V A TE 

Hon. George G. Fogg Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: Aug. 16, 1860 

I am annoyed some by the printed paragraph below, in relation 
to myself, taken from the N.Y. Herald's correspondence from this 
place of August 8th. 

He had, he said, on one occasion been invited to go into Kentucky 
and revisit some of the scenes with whose history his father in his life- 
time had been identified. On asking by letter whether Judge Lynch 
would be present, he received no response; and he therefore came to 
the conclusion that the invitation was a trap laid by some designing 
person to inveigle him into a slave State for the purpose of doing vio- 
lence to his person. 2 

This is decidedly wrong. I did not say it. I do not impugn the cor- 
respondent. I suppose he misconceived the statement from the fol- 
lowing incident. Soon after the Chicago nomination I was written 
to by a highly respectable gentleman of Hardin County, Ky, in- 
quiring if I was a son of Thomas Lincoln, whom he had known 
long ago, in that county. I answered that I was, and that I was 
myself born there. He wrote again, and, among other things, (did 
not invite me but) simply inquired if it would not be agreeable to 
me to revisit the scenes of my childhood. I replied, among other 
things, "It would indeed; but would you not Lynch me?" He did 
not write again. 

I have, playfully., (and never otherwise) related this incident 
several times; and I suppose I did so to the Herald correspondent, 
though I do not remember it. If I did, it is all that I did say, from 
which the correspondent could have inferred his statement. 

Now, I dislike, exceedingly, for Kentuckians to understand that 
I am charging them with a purpose to inveigle me, and do violence 
to me. Yet I can not go into the newspapers. Would not the editor 
of the Herald, upon being shown this letter, insert the short correc- 
tion, which you find upon the inclosed scrap? 

Please try him, unless you perceive some sufficient reason to 
the contrary. In no event, let my name be publicly used. Yours 
very truly A. 



CORRECTION 

We have such assurance as satisfies us that our correspondent 
writing from Springfield, Ills, under date of Aug. 8 was mistaken 
in representing Mr. Lincoln as expressing a suspicion of a design to 
inveigle him into Kentucky for the purpose of doing him violence. 

[96] 



AUGUST I/, i860 

Mr. Lincoln neither entertains, nor has intended to express any 
such suspicion. 

1 ALS, CSmH. For further discussion of the subject of this letter, see Lincoln 
to Fogg, August 29, and Lincoln to Haycraft, August 16 and 23, infra. 

2 The clipping is pasted on the letter. 

To Samuel Haycraft 1 

Hon. Saml. Haycraft Springfield, Ills. Aug. 16. 1860 

My dear Sir: A correspondent of the New- York Herald, who 
was here a week ago, writing to that paper, represents me as say- 
ing I had been invited to visit Kentucky, but that I suspected it was 
a trap to inveigle me into Kentucky, in order to do violence to me. 
This is wholly a mistake. I said no such thing. I do not remem- 
ber, but possibly I did mention my correspondence with you. But 
very certainly I was not guilty of stating, or insinuating, a sus- 
picion of any intended violence, deception, or other wrong, against 
m e, by you, or any other Kentuckian. Thinking this Herald cor- 
respondence might fall under your eye, I think it due to myself 
to enter my protest against the correctness of this part of it. I 
scarcely think the correspondent was malicious; but rather that 
he misunderstood what was said. Yours very truly 

A. LINCOLN. 

1 ALS, CSmH. See Lincoln to Haycraft, August 23, infra. 

To James F. Simmons 1 

PRIVATE 

Hon. J. F. Simmons Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Aug. 17. 1860 

I had not heard a word from Rhode-Island for a long time, till 
this morning, when I received a letter intimating that Douglas is 
inlisting some rich men there, who know how to use money, and 
that it is endangering the State. 2 How is this? Please write me. 
Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, IHi. James F. Simmons was U.S. Senator from Rhode Island. There 
is no reply from Simmons in the Lincoln Papers. 

2 See Lincoln to Weed, infra, n.i. 

To Thurlow Weed 1 

PRIVATE 

Hon. T. Weed Springfield, Ills- Aug. 17, 1860. 

My dear Sir Yours of the 13th. was received this morning. 
Douglas is managing the Bell-element with great adroitness. He 

[97] 



AUGUST l8, i860 

had his men, in Kentucky, to vote for the Bell candidate, producing 
a result which has badly alarmed and damaged Breckinridge, and, 
at the same time, has induced the Bell men to suppose that Bell 
will certainly be President, if they can keep a few of the North- 
ern States away from us, by throwing them to Douglas. But you, 
better than I, understand all this. 

I think there will be the most extraordinary effort ever made, 
to carry New- York for Douglas. You, and all others who write me 
from your state, think the effort can not succeed; and I hope you 
are right; still it will require close watching, and great effort on 
the other side. 

Herewith I send you a copy of a letter, 2 written at New- York, 
which sufficiently explains itself, and which may, or may not, give 
you a valuable hint. 

You have seen that Bell tickets have been put on the track, both 
here, and in Indiana. In both cases, the object has been, I think, 
the same as the Hunt 3 movement in N. Y to throw the States to 
Douglas. In our state we know the thing is engineered by Douglas 
men; and -we do not believe they can make a great deal out of it. 
Yours very truly A. 



1 ALS, NRU-Thurlow Weed Papers on deposit. "Weed wrote on August 13 
that the fusion between the Douglas and Bell factions in New York would not 
affect the result, which would be the same "if all the factions were to unite 
against us." The Douglas men were absurdly confident because they believed 
Seward men would work against Lincoln. Fusion in Pennsylvania would fail. 
Rhode Island was in danger because Douglas had got hold of some rich manu- 
facturers who "know how to use money." (DLC-RTL). 

2 The copy, not in Lincoln's handwriting, is without signature, but bears the 
heading "167 Broadway N.Y. 13th Aug./6o." The writer relayed information 
from John Hardy, secretary of the Democratic National Executive Committee, 
that the Douglas party in New York would attempt no union with Breckin- 
ridge forces and that Bell men would go for Douglas. He added that three- 
fourths of the Fillmore vote would go for Lincoln and that "if Hunt Brooks & 
Co. keep up [the]ir engineering, all the Bell voters in [the] State can be put 
in an omnibus. . . .'* (NRU-Weed Papers). 

3 Washington Hunt and James Brooks were former Whigs and ex-representa- 
tives in Congress, actively leading the Bell movement in New York. 

To Charles H. Fisher 1 

C. H Fisher, Esq Springfield 111 Aug i8th 1860. 

Dear Sir Your letter of the 14th inst. came duly to hand, to- 
gether with the book written by your brother which you are kind 
enough to send me. Please accept my thanks for the same. "While 
I have not yet found time to examine it, I doubt not I shall find 
much pleasure in its perusal. Yours Truly A. LINCOLN. 

1 LS, PHi, Fisher's letter of August 14 is not in the Lincoln Papers, but see 
Lincoln to Fisher, August 27, infra. 

[98] 



To George Bliss and Others 1 

Messrs. Geo. Bliss, & others. Springfield, Ills. 

Man[a]gers &c. Aug. 22, 1860 

Gentlemen Yours of the 8th. inviting my attendance at your 
National Exhibition of Imported Blood, & American breeds of 
Horses, on the 4th. 5th. 6th. & /th. days of September, at Spring- 
field, Mass, was received in due course, and should have been 
answered sooner. 

For reasons not neccessary to be mentioned, I am constrained to 
decline the honor which you so kindly tender me. Your Obt. Servt. 

A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, IHi. See Lincoln to Fogg, August 4, supra. George Bliss "was a law- 
yer at Springfield, Massachusetts, president of the Worcester and Albany Rail- 
road, and for several terms a member of the Massachusetts legislature. 

To Samuel Hay craft 1 

[Hon Sam Haycraft [Springfield, 111 

My dear S] Aug 23 1860] 

Yours of the igth. is just received. I now fear I may have given 
you some uneasiness by my last letter. I did not mean to intimate 
that I had, to any extent, been involved, or embarrassed, by you; 
nor yet, to draw from you anything to relieve myself from diffi- 
culty. My only object was to assure you that I had not, as repre- 
sented by the Herald correspondent, charged you with an attempt 
to inveigle me into Kentucky to do me violence. I believe no such 
thing of you, or of Kentuckians generally; and I dislike to be rep- 
resented to them as slandering them in that way. [Yours truly 

A 



1 AL, CSmJEL The letter has been mutilated by cutting away the top of the 
page, the close, and signature, and the removed portions have been restored 
in another hand. The restored date is somewhat difficult to read, but appears to 
be "Aug. 23." The envelope is postmarked but the numeral "3" is not clear. 
Hay-craft's endorsement on the envelope seems to establish the date, however, 
as follows: "Aug. 23. i86o/This not answrd/s6. Aug. answrd." Haycraft had 
written on August 19, that he fully understood the playfulness of Lincoln's 
language in the letter of June 4, and that he wished to clear himself of any 
knowledge of the New York correspondent's statement. He had taken the fact 
that Lincoln's letter was marked "private" to mean "not for publication," but 
had showed it to a few friends. If Lincoln desired him to make a statement to 
the New York Herald., he would be pleased to do so (DLC-RTL). 

To Robert C. Schenck 1 

Hon. Robert C. Schencfc Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Aug, 23. 1860 

Yours of the i6th. was received two days ago, and that of the 
i8th. inclosing Mr. Judd's note, was received, last evening. I am 

[99] 



AUGUST 24, i860 

very glad you are coming among us. The time we must fix accord- 
ing to your own suggestion; and the places, I wish to have a hand 
in fixing myself. My judgment is to have you in this old whig re- 
gion, I shall consult with Judd, have the appointments made, and 
you duly notified. We really tvant you. Will notify you at Dayton. 
Yours very truly A. 



1ALS, IHi. Robert C. Schenck of Dayton, Ohio, representative in congress 
(1843-1851, 1863-1871), and also a major general in the Union army until he 
resigned to run for congress in 1863, had written August 6 and 18 of his willing- 
ness to take the stump in Illinois (DLC-RTL), 

To John Hanks 1 

John Hanks, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: Aug. 24. 1860 

Yours of the 2 3rd. is received. My recollection is that I never 
lived in the same neighborhood with Charles Hanks till I came to 
Macon county, Illinos, after I was twenty-one years of age. As I 
understand, he and I were born in different counties of Kentucky, 
and never saw each other in that State; that while I was a very 
small boy my father removed to Indiana, and your father with his 
family remained in Kentucky for many years. At length you, a 
young man grown, came to our neighborhood, and were at our 
house, off and on, a great deal for three, four, or five years; and 
during the time, your father, with his whole family, except Wil- 
liam, Charles, and William Miller, who had married one of your 
sisters, came to the same neighborhood in Indiana, and remained a 
year or two, and then went to Illinois. William, Charles, and Wil- 
liam Miller, had removed directly from Kentucky to Illinois, not 
even passing through our neighborhood in Indiana. 

Once, a year or two before I came to Illinois, Charles, with some 
others, had been back to Kentucky, and returning to Illinois, passed 
through our neighborhood in Indiana. He stopped, I think, but one 
day, (certainly not as much as three) ; and this was the first time 
I ever saw him in my life, and the only time, till I came to Illinois, 
as before stated. The year I passed in Macon county I was with 
him a good deal mostly on his own place, where I helped him at 
breaking prarie, with a joint team of his and ours, which in 
turn, broke some on the new place we were improving. 

This is, as I remember it. Dont let this letter be made public by 
any means. Yours very truly A. 



1 ALS-P, ISLA. John Hanks wrote on August 23 that he had been thinking 
about answering his brother Charles Hanks* letter and wished to know when 
and where Lincoln first saw Charles. He also promised not to use Lincoln's 
letter (DLC-RTL). Charles Hanks had published a letter in the Decatur Mag- 

[100] 



AUGUST 27, i860 

net (copied by the Fulton County Ledger, July 31, 1860), in which he disputed 
the authenticity of the rails brought into the Decatur convention on May 9 
by John Hanks and posed as an intimate relation who was politically opposed 
to Lincoln's principles. 

To Charles H. Fisher 1 

Private 

C. H. Fisher Springfield, Ills- Aug. 27, 1860 

Dear Sir: Your second note, inclosing the supposed speech of 
Mr. Dallas to Lord Brougham, is received. I have read the speech 
quite through, together with the real author's introductory, and 
closing remarks. I have also looted through the long preface of the 
book to-day. Both seem to be well written, and contain many 
things with which I could agree, and some with which I could not. 
A specimen of the latter is the declaration, in the closing remarks 
upon the "speech" that the institution is a necessity imposed on us 
by the negro race. That the going many thousand miles, seizing a 
set of savages, bringing them here, and making slaves of them, is 
a necessity imposed on us by them, involves a species of logic to 
which my mind will scarcely assent. 2 

1 ADf, DLC-RTL. Fisher wrote from Philadelphia, August 22, enclosing a 
clipping from the North American and U.S. Gazette "signed *CeciT who is my 
brother, giving his idea of what Mr. Dallas [George M. Dallas, minister to 
Great Britain] might have replied to Lord Brougham." The clipping refers to 
a meeting of an international statistical congress in London attended by a Ne- 
gro delegate from Canada. Henry Peter Brougham had made a speech chiding 
the United States for slavery, and Minister Dallas had said nothing in reply. 
The book referred to was probably one of two written by Sidney G. (pseudo- 
nym "Cecil") Fisher: Law of the Territories (1859) and "Kanzas and. the Con- 
stitution (1856). 

2 Lincoln did not finish the letter. The envelope containing Fisher's letter 
bears Nicolay's endorsement: "needs no answer"; but Lincoln apparently was 
tempted to reply. 

To Amory Holbrook 1 

Amory Holbrook, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Aug. 27. 1860 

Your very agreeable letter of July 2ist. was duly received. It is 
matter of much regret here that Logan 2 failed of his election. He 
grew up and studied law in this place, and his parents and sisters 
still reside here. We are also anxious for the result of your two 
U.S. Senatorial elections. 

I shall be pleased to hear from you again. Yours very truly 

A. 



1 ALS, OrHL Amory Holbrook, who had met Lincoln in Massachusetts in 
September, 1848, wrote from Oregon City, Oregon, where he had migrated in 
1849, concerning the political scene in Oregon. He was a member of the 
Oregon legislature (DLC-RTL) . 2 David Logan. 

[101] 



To John M. Read 1 

Hon. John M. Read: Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Aug. 27. 1860 

The miniature likeness of myself , taken by your friend, J. Henry 
Brown, is an excellent one, so far as I can judge. To my unprao 
ticed eye, it is without fault. Yours very truly 

A. 



1 ALS, DLC-Read Papers. A similar letter from Mrs. Lincoln dated August 
25 is in the Read Papers. Judge John M. Read of the Pennsylvania Supreme 
Court, a prominent Philadelphia Republican, had sent a young Philadelphia 
artist to paint a portrait of Lincoln to be engraved by John Sartain for use in 
the campaign. Read and other Eastern Republicans were dissatisfied with the 
photographs of Lincoln which were in circulation during the campaign (see 
Lincoln to Babcock, September 13, infra). 

To George G. Fogg 1 

Hon. George G. Fogg. Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Aug. 29, 1860 

Yours of the 23rd. was only received yesterday evening. 

You have done precisely right in that matter with the Herald. 
Do nothing further about it. Although it "wrongs me, and annoys 
me some, I prefer letting it run it's course, to getting into the papers 
over my own name. I regret the trouble it has given you, and 
thank you also for having performed your part so cheerfully and 
correctly. 

What you say of the Empire state is of a piece with all the news 
I receive from there. The whole field appears reasonably well. 
Yours very truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, CSmH. On August 23, Fogg replied to Lincoln's letter of August 16, 
supra, that he had called on James G. Bennett of the Herald and found him 
well inclined to Lincoln personally. Bennett would permit the corrections to 
appear over Fogg's name, or any responsible name, or dated at Springfield 
without name, but would not allow it to appear editorially or by a corre- 
spondent, which would be admitting an error, unless he could say it was by 
Lincoln's request. Fogg thought the correction under such stipulations was not 
desirable, and Norman Judd, who was in New York, agreed. Fogg concluded 
by stating that in his opinion the Republican nomination of Edwin D. Morgan 
for governor of New York was the strongest that could be made (DLC-RTL) . 

To Zachariah Chandler 1 

Hon. Z. Chandler Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Aug. 31, 1860 

Your kind letter of the 2 8th is duly received. I very well re- 
member meeting you at Kalamazoo in 1856. I very well remember 

[102] 



AUGUST 31, i860 

the jovial elderly lady, and wife of an M. C. with whom we took 
tea, calling you "Zach Chandler." 

Your kind invitation I suppose I must decline. It is the opinion 
of friends, backed by my own judgment, that I should not really, 
or apparently, be showing myself about the country. 

Please accept my thanks for the kindness of your invitation. 
Yours very truly A. LINCOLN 

1 Copy, ISLA. Chandler wrote from Detroit, August 28, inviting Mr. and 
Mrs. Lincoln to be his guests on October 2, at the time of the Michigan State 
Fair (DLC-RTL). 

To Benjamin F. James 1 

B. F. James, Esq. Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: Aug. 31. 1860 

Your kind letter of congratulation, dated the 2/th. was duly re- 
ceived. How time gallops along with us! Look at these great big 
boys of yours and mine, when it is but yesterday that we and their 
mothers were unmarried. 

Make my respects to Mrs. James & Louis, and believe me 
Yours as ever A. 



1 ALS, IHi, The Lincoln Papers contain no letters from Lincoln's old friend 
Benjamin F. James written in 1860. James was practicing law in Chicago at this 
time. 

To John M. Pomeroy 1 

Private 

Hon. John - , Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: Aug. 31. 1860 

Yours of the 27th. is duly received. It consists almost exclusive- 
ly of a historical detail of some local troubles among some of our 
friends in Pennsylvania; and I suppose it's object is to guard me 
against forming a prejudice against Mr. McC - . I have not 
heard near so much upon that subject as you probably suppose; 
and I am slow to listen to criminations among friends, and never 
expouse their quarrels on either side. My sincere wish is that both 
sides will allow by-gones to be by-gones, and look to the present & 
future only. Yours very truly A. LIKCOLK 

1 ALS, PHC. Pomeroy's name and that of Alexander K. McClure, chairman 
of the Pennsylvania State Committee, have been eradicated from the letter and 
replaced by lines. Pomeroy's letter of August 27 (DLC-RTL) establishes the 
identity of both men, and traces the quarrel between Cameron and Curtin fac- 
tions of Pennsylvania Republicans, which at the time of his writing centered in 
the effort of the Cameron faction to "get up a Committee ostensibly auxiliary 
to the State Committee but which was really intended to supersede & destroy 

[103] 



SEPTEMBER, i860 

it. The . . . movement is now virtually broken up & henceforth cordial coop- 
eration with the State Committee may be expected from all but Cameron <fe his 
immediate friends. . . ." Pomeroy wrote as a member of the state committee 
who had been a delegate to the Chicago convention. 

To John Hill 1 

John Hill, Esq. Springfield, Ills. 

Petersburg, Ills. Sep. 1860 

Sir: A pamphlet, over name, bearing the title of "Opposing prin- 
ciples of Henry Clay, and Abraham Lincoln" is being circulated 
among the people. I quote from it as follows, towit: 

SLAVERY IN THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA. 

In 1837, as a member of the Illinois Legislature, Mr. Liisr COUNT, with 
only four others, voted against the following resolution: 

"Resolved, That the Government cannot abolish slavery in the Dis- 
trict of Columbia against the consent of the citizens of said District 
without a manifest breach of good faith." [See House Jour., 1836-7, p. 
240.] 

In Congress, at the session of 1848-49, he voted to institute measures 
for the abolition of slavery in the District. In 1839, in the Illinois Leg- 
islature, he voted against a resolution to the effect 

"That as the General Government cannot do, directly, what it is 
clearly prohibited from doing indirectly, that it is the openly declared 
design of the Abolitionist of this nation to abolish slavery in the Dis- 
trict of Columbia, with a view to its ultimate abolishment in the 
States; .... and that, therefore, Congress ought not to abolish slav- 
ery in the District of Columbia." [House Jour., 1838-9, p. 329. ] 2 

It is seen in this that you arraign Mr. Lincoln, first, for a vote in 
the Illinois Legislature of 1836-7 secondly for a vote in Congress 
in 1848-9, and thirdly for a vote in the Illinois Legislature of 1839. 

i AL, DLC-RTL. John Hill was the son of Samuel Hill, Lincoln's old friend 
of New Salem days. John's pamphlet was reprinted from a signed article 
printed in the Missouri Republican, July 24, 1860. Lincoln's letter seems not to 
have been completed or sent. Its manner suggests his intention that it be pub- 
lished or copied as a communication from some one else than himself, and the 
two fragments (infra} dealing with the charges made in Hill's pamphlet sug- 
gest that an article may have been prepared for publication in lieu of the letter. 
Lincoln's resentment of Hill's lack of respect for truth is all the more interest- 
ing m view of the fact that Hill became the prime source of the Ann Rutledge 
story, the tradition of Lincoln's infidelity, and a number of other spurious or 
dubious traditions concerning Lincoln's New Salem years, when in the Menard 
Axis, February 15, 1862, he published an article entitled "A Romance of 
Reality," composed largely of family gossip. It was this article which led Hern- 
don to elaborate on the Ann Rutledge episode when he began collecting material 
for his biography of Lincoln in 1866, and Hill rather than Herndon deserves 
recognition for primary irresponsibility in Erst publishing stories which have 
been perpetuated in popular belief. 

2 This excerpt, including bracketed references, appears in the source as a clip- 
ping from the pamphlet, pasted on the manuscript page. 

[104] 



SEPTEMBER, i860 

As authority for the first arraignment, you say ("See House 
Jour, p 240"). Now, I have that Journal, at this moment open be- 
fore me, at page 240 and there is, upon that page, absolutely 
nothing upon that subject. But on pages 243 & 244 there is a series 
of resolutions, four in number, the third of which is very nearly, 
but not quite, such as you set out. But they were not voted upon 
that day; on the contrary, as appears by the same Journal, at pages 
248 & 249, they were referred to a select committee. Seven days 
afterwards, as shown by the same Journal, at pages 309-310 & 311. 
the committee reported the resolutions back to the House, with an 
amendment proposed to each one of them; which amendments 
were all adopted by the House; and then the series, as amended, 
passed the House by Yeas and Nays, Mr. Lincoln, and five others 
voting against them. 

Now, the point is, John, that the Journal does not show in what 
shape any of those resolutions stood, when Mr. Lincoln voted 
against them. It does show that they were all amended were all 
changed from their original form; but what new shape they took 
does nowhere appear in the Journal. And hence, John, in stating 
that Mr. Lincoln voted against a resolution, in the shape you al- 
ledge he did, you state what is almost certainly false, and certainly 
what you do not know to be true. 

But, more than this, John: These resolutions went to the senate, 
and were passed by that body, as appears by the Senate Journal, 
of that session, at pages 277 & 297. They were not spread upon 
the Senate Journal either, so that their substance and form remains 
entirely uncertain. 

But again, John, Mr. Lincoln, with his colleague, Dan Stone, at 
the same session, and with reference to these identical resolutions, 
defined his position in relation to Slavery in the District of Colum- 
bia, by a written protest, entered upon the same Journal of the 
House of Representatives, at pages 817-818, and which entry and 
protest is as follows, towit. 

The following protest was presented to the House which was read 
and ordered to be spread on the Journals, to-wit: 

Resolutions upon the subject of domestic slavery having passed both 
branches of the General Assembly at its present session, the under- 
signed hereby protest against the passage of the same. 

They believe that the institution of slavery is founded on both in- 
justice and bad policy; but that the promulgation of abolition doctrines 
tend rather to increase than to abate its evils. 

They believe that the Congress of the United States has no power, 
under the constitution to interfere with the institution of slavery in 
the different States. 

[105] 



SEPTEMBER, i860 

They believe that the Congress of the United States has the power 
under the constitution to abolish slavery in the District of Columbia; 
but that that power ought not to be exercised, unless at the request of 
the people of said District. 

The difference between these opinions and those contained in the 
said resolutions, is their reason for entering this protest. 

DAN". STOINTE 
A. LINCOLN 

Representatives from the County of Sangamon. 3 

And now, John, we know you had these Journals in your hands 
were ransacking them, and know of all these things and yet you 
suppressed them. Why did you suppress them? 

Your second arraignment of Mr. Lincoln is seen to be in these 
words, towit. 

"In Congress, at the session of 1848-49 he voted to institute 
measures for the abolition of slavery in the District." 

For this arraignment, you refer to no authority whatever; and 
with the Congressional Globe, for that session, now before me, I 
venture to say Mr. Lincoln gave no such vote. At page 38 of that 
volume of the congressional Globe, I find that on the question of 
granting leave to Mr. Palfrey 4 to introduce a bill "to repeal all acts, 
or parts of acts, of congress, establishing or maintaining slavery, or 
the slave-trade in the District of Columbia" taken by yeas and 
nays, Mr. Lincoln voted against granting the leave. And further 
on, at pages 55 & 56 on the question of laying upon the table, a bill 
already before the House, "to authorize the people of the District 
of Columbia to express their desires as to the existence of slavery 
therein" taken by yeas and nays, Mr. Lincoln voted to lay the bill 
on the table. And these are the only instances of votes, on questions 
of abolishing slavery in the District of Columbia, being taken by 
yeas and nays, during that session. 

You were not very prudent, John, in stating a falsehood in this 
instance: but you were as prudent as possible, under the circum- 
stances, to quote no authority by which to prove it. 

Although Mr. Lincoln gave no other votes on the question, it is 
true, that he drew up, and sought to get before the House of Rep- 
resentatives, at that session, a bill for the abolition of slavery in 
the District of Columbia, upon the conditions that the abolition 
should be gradual, and only upon a vote of the majority of the peo- 
ple of the District, and with compensation to unwilling owners, 
and also embracing a fugitive slave clause, and an exception in 

3 The protest, not in Lincoln's handwriting, is a separate page inserted in the 
manuscript. It appears in the present edition under date of March 3, 1837, supra. 

4 John G. Palfrey, representative from Massachusetts. 

[106] 



SEPTEMBER, i860 

favor of Officers of the Government, while in the District on the 
public business; all which appears in the same volume of the con- 
gressional Globe, at pages 212-244. 5 

As to your third arraignment of Mr. Lincoln, referring to the 
Ills. House Journal of 1838-9. page 329, I find on pages 322 & 323 
of that Journal, that to a "resolution from the Senate requiring the 
Engrossing clerks of the Senate and House, respectively to make 
out copies of memorials and resolutions to be transmitted to con- 
gress &c." Mr. Calhoun (Candle-box) 6 offered, as an amendment, 
a long preamble, and five resolutions about slavery, one of which 
resolutions contains language substantially as you have quoted; 
that on motion, the preamble and resolutions -were laid on the table 
by yeas and nays, shown at page 329-330 Mr. Lincoln voting to 
lay them on the table. Whether they were thus laid upon the table, 
with any reference to their merits, or because of their incongruity, 
as an amendment to a resolution from the Senate, prescribing the 
duty of the Engrossing clerks, fair minded men will judge; or, per- 
haps N. W. Edwards, now a Douglas man, and Gen. W. F. Thorn- 
ton, one of the Douglas delegates to the late Charleston and Balti- 
more conventions can tell they being two of the fortyfour who 
with Mr. Lincoln voted to lay them on the table. 

August 27. 1858. In his joint debate with Senator Douglas at 
Freeport, in answer to certain questions which had been pro- 
pounded by Douglass, Mr. Lincoln said: "The fourth one is in re- 
gard to slavery in the District of Columbia. In relation to that, I 
have my mind very distinctly made up. I should be exceedingly 
glad to see slavery abolished in the District of Columbia. I believe 
that congress possesses the constitutional power to abolish it. Yet 
as a member of congress I should not, with my present views, be 
in favor of endeavoring to abolish slavery in the District of Colum- 
bia, unless it would be upon these conditions: First, that the aboli- 
tion should be gradual. Second, that it should be on a vote of the 

5 Vide supra, January 10, 1849. 

6 John Calhoun of Sangamon County was nicknamed "Candle-box" as the re- 
sult of an episode during his later career as Surveyor General of Kansas. 
Elected president of tjhe Lecompton Convention, Calhoun was charged with 
counting and reporting the vote on the Lecompton Constitution. Departing for 
"Washington soon after the election, he left the papers in charge of the chief 
clerk in the surveyor general's office. In the investigation which ensued, the 
clerk refused access to the returns and falsely stated that Calhoun had carried 
them to Washington. After considerable intrigue and an investigation by a 
committee of the territorial legislature, the clerk, L. A. McLane, was revealed 
to have hidden the returns in a candle-box buried under a woodpile. When 
McLane fled from the territory, his superior, Calhoun, bore the chief odium of 
the episode. 

[107] 



SEPTEMBER, i860 

majority of the qualified voters of the District; and third that com- 
pensation should be made to unwilling owners. With these three 
conditions, I confess I would be exceedingly glad to see congress 
abolish slavery in the District of Columbia, and, in the language of 
Henry Clay, "sweep from the capitol that foul blot upon our na- 
tion." (Joint Debates, page 89 7 

7 The manuscript ends abruptly before the bottom of the page, suggesting that 
it was never completed. 

Fragments of an Answer to John Hill 1 

[September, 1860] 

The protest, before mentioned, placed on the Journal of the 
Illinois House of Representatives more than twenty three years 
ago; the draft of a bill, spread on the Congressional Globe more 
than eleven years ago; and his declaration in the Freeport debate 
not quite two years ago, are all in harmony with each other, and 
show conclusively what Mr. Lincoln's views are in regard to Slav- 
ery in the District of Columbia. They show that he thinks congress 
has the constitutional power to abolish it; and that the power 
might properly be exercised, ivith substantially such conditions as 
set out in the bill drawn by himself; and that it ought not to be 
exercised without such conditions. 

The foregoing is the whole (excepting the report as indicated) 
which, after full examination, can be found on the subject of slav- 
ery, in the Journals of the Illinois Senate and House of Repre- 
sentatives, for the session of 1836-7. 

It is seen that the form in which the resolutions passed, and 
were voted against by Mr. Lincoln, nowhere appears the Journal 
showing that all of them were changed from the original form, by 
amendments, without showing what they were in the amended 
form. 

Nor is this of the least consequence in determining Mr. Lincoln's 
views upon the subject, at that time; since, by the protest, he 
placed upon the same Journal, his own views upon the subject, in 
his own well considered language, which stand of record for the 
inspection of all who choose 

1 AD, DLC-RTL. In the Lincoln Papers these two fragments are separated 
from the draft of a letter to John Hill (supra) . They have been linked with the 
reply to Hill "because of their obvious similarity of reference. Possibly the frag- 
ments were intended for an editorial in the Illinois State Journal which Lin- 
coln changed his mind about writing. The Journal had already answered Hill 
in part in the issue of August 25, and in the issue of September 19 printed the 
extracts from the House Journal, 1836-1837, to which Lincoln referred. 

[108] 



To Henry Wilson 1 

Hon. Henry Wilson Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: - Sep. i. 1860 

Yours of August sgth. was received yesterday. 

The point you press the importance of thorough organization 
is felt, and appreciated by our friends everywhere. And yet it in- 
volves so much more of dry, and irksome labor, that most of them 
shrink from it preferring parades, and shows, and monster meet- 
ings. I know not how this can be helped. I do what I can in my 
position, for organization; but it does not amount to so much as it 
should. 

I shall be pleased to hear from you at all times. Yours very truly 

A. LINCOLN. 

1 ALS, owned by Edward C. Stone, Boston, Massachusetts. Henry Wilson, 
shoe manufacturer and U.S. Senator from Massachusetts (1855-1873), wrote 
that he feared Republicans were overconfident and were neglecting organiza- 
tion in New England and New York (DLC-RTL) . 

To John Coulter 1 

Private 

John Coulter, Esq Springfield, Ills- 

Dear Sir: Sept. 4. 1860 

Yours of the 2Qth. is received; and I presume I understand what 
has prompted you to write it. In 1832 I was first a candidate for 
the Legislature, with some ten or a dozen other candidates. Peter 
Cartwright, and three others were elected, of whom I was not one, 
In 1834 he, and I, and several others, again become candidates; he 
declined before the election, I saw the race through, and, with 
three others, was elected. In 1835 he became a candidate to fill a 
vacancy in the State Senate, and his sole competitor, Job Fletcher, 
beat him by near six hundred majority. 

In 1836, 1838, & 1840, I was successively elected to the Legis- 
lature he not being a candidate at either of those elections. 

I then ceased to be a candidate for anything till 1846, when I 
ran for Congress. Mr. Cartwright was my competitor, and I beat 
him, as I recollect 1511 majority, being about double the party ma- 
jority of the District. 

I was never a candidate for congress at any other time, and 
never had any contest with Mr. Cartwright other than as I have 
stated. 

Please do not make this public Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

iALS, CCamStJ-Doheny Collection. John Coulter was a resident of Niles, 
Michigan. His letter of August 29 is not in the Lincoln Papers. 

[109] 



To Hannibal Hamlin 1 

Springfield, Illinois, September 4, 1860. 

My dear Sir: I am annoyed some by a letter from a friend in 
Chicago, in which the folio-wing passage occurs: "Hamlin has writ- 
ten Colfax 2 that two members of Congress will, he fears, be lost in 
Maine the first and sixth districts; and that Washburne's 3 major- 
ity for governor will not exceed six thousand." 

I had heard something lite this six weeks ago, but had been 
assured since that it was not so. Your secretary of state, Mr. 
Smith, 4 I think, whom you introduced to me by letter, gave this 
assurance; more recently, Mr. Fessenden, 5 our candidate for Con- 
gress in one of those districts, wrote a relative here that his election 
was sure by at least five thousand, and that Washburne's majority 
would be from 14,000 to 17,000; and still later, Mr. Fogg, of New 
Hampshire, now at New York serving on a national committee, 
wrote me that we were having a desperate fight in Maine, which 
would end in a splendid victory for us. 

Such a result as you seem to have predicted in Maine, in your 
letter to Colfax, would, I fear, put us on the down-hill track, lose us 
the State elections in Pennsylvania and Indiana, and probably ruin 
us on the main turn in November. 

You must not allow it. Yours very truly, A. 



1 NH, VI, 54-55. 

2 See Lincoln to Medill, infra. Hamlin replied to Lincoln on September 8: 
"I have not wriitten to Colfax at all, nor to any one any thing like the extract 
in your letter. . . ." He explained, however, that the third and sixth congres- 
sional districts were doubtful, since the majority in both in the last election had 
been less than a hundred (DLC-R.TL). 

3 Israel Washburn, Jr., who spelled his name without an "e." 

4 Noah Smith of Calais, Maine. Hamlin's letter introducing him is not in the 
Lincoln Papers. 

5 Samuel C. Fessenden, brother of Senator William P. Fessenden. 



To Joseph Medill 1 

PB.IV A TE 

J. Medill, Esq Springfield, 

My dear Sir Sep. 4. 1860 

Yours of Aug. 3oth. for some cause, only reached me last night. 
As to Pennsylvania, I have a letter from Gen. Cameron, 2 dated 
Aug. 2Qth. in which, among other things, he says: 

"You may as well be getting your inaugeral address ready, so as 
to have plenty time to make it short. If possible we are daily be- 
coming stronger in Pennsylvania, and in New- Jersey all is right." 

[110] 



SEPTEMBER 5, i860 

Last night, just as I had read your letter, Mr. David Taggart 
called upon me. He is a very intelligent gentleman, lately was 
Speaker of the Penn. Senate, and is now upon our electoral ticket, 
and residing at Northumberland. He left home Thursday the 
3Oth.; and he is very confident that Penn. is abun[dan]tly safe, 
both for Curtin 3 in Oct- & the National ticket in Novr. This from 
Cameron & Taggart, constitute [s] my latest news from Penn. 

I am more annoyed by what you write me of Maine. Long ago 
I had heard about danger of two members of congress there; but 
at least six weeks since Mr. Hamlin 4 wrote me "all is safe in New- 
England ["] ; and very recently Mr. Fogg 5 of N.H. wrote from N. 
York saying: "We are having a desperate fight in Maine; but it 
will end in a splendid triumph for us." He had just come from 
Maine. 

What you say about the Northern 30 counties of Illinois pleases 
me. Keep good your promise that they will give as much majority 
as they did for Fremont., and we will let you off. We can not be 
beaten, nor even hard run, in the state, if that holds true. Yours 
as ever A 



1 ALS, owned by the Chicago Tribune, Chicago, Illinois. Medill's letter of 
August 30 expressed fear that "our folks are resting in false security as to Pa.," 
and reported that Hamlin had written Coif ax the first and sixth congressional 
districts in Maine would "be lost, but that "We are stirring up Northern Illinois, 
and will give you the Fremont majority in 30 Northern counties." He enclosed 
a letter from E. Ethridge to Schuyler Colfax expressing worry about Indiana 
(DLC-RTL). 2 Simon Cameron. 

3 Andrew G. Curtin, candidate for governor. 

4 Hannibal Hamlin to Lincoln, July 23 "All is well in New England. . . ." 
(DLC-RTL). 

5 George G. Fogg to Lincoln, August 23 "Our friends in Maine are having 
a great fight -which is to be f ollowed by a great victory. . . ." (DLC-BTL) . 

To Anson G. Chester 1 

Private 
Anson G. Chester, Esq. Springfield, Ills., Sept 5, 1860 

My dear Sir: Yours of the ist is received. The extract upon a 
newspaper slip which you sent, and which I herewith return, is a 
base forgery, so far as its authorship is imputed to me. I never said 
anything like it, at any time or place. I do not recognize it as any- 
thing I have ever seen bef 9re, emanating from any source. I wish 
my name not to be used; but my friends will be entirely safe in 
denouncing the thing as a forgery, so far as it is ascribed to me. 
Yours very truly A. LIJNTCOILIN" 

1 Tracy, pp. 161-62. Anson G. Chester was editor of the Buffalo, New York, 
Commercial Advertiser* In 1864 he left journalism for a commission as major 

[in] 



SEPTEMBER 5 5 i860 

and appointment as New York military agent at Buffalo, and in later life en- 
tered the Presbyterian ministry. His letter of September i is not in the Lincoln 
Papers. See the note, Lincoln to A. Chester, March 14, supra. The newspaper 
clipping was undoubtedly from the Chicago Times and Herald. The Illinois 
State Journal, September 6, 1860, denounced the forgery in the following ar- 
ticle, which may have been written by Lincoln and was certainly authorized by 
him: 

"In the Chicago Times and Herald of the 4th we find the following, purport- 
ing to be *a quotation from a speech made by Mr. Lincoln in 1844,* as taken 
from the Macomb Eagle: 

'Mr. Jefferson is a statesman whose praises are never out of the mouths of 
the Democratic party. Let us attend to this uncompromising friend of freedom 
whose name is continually invoked against the Whig party. The character of 
Jefferson was repulsive. Continually puling about liberty, equality, and the 
degrading curse of slavery, he brought his own children to the hammer, and 
made money of his debaucheries. Even at his death he did not manumit his 
numerous offspring, but left them soul and body to degradation and the cart 
whip. A daughter of this vaunted champion of Democracy was sold some years 
ago at public auction in New Orleans, and purchased by a society of gentlemen, 
who wished to testify by her liberation their admiration of the statesman, who 
"Dreamt of freedom in a slave's embrace." 

'This single line I have quoted gives more insight to the character of the 
man than whole volumes of panegyric. It will outlive his epitaph, write it 
who may.' 

"This is a bold and deliberate forgery, whether originating with the Chicago 
Times and Herald or the Macomb Eagle. Mr Lincoln never used any such lan- 
guage in any speech at any time. Throughout the whole of his political life, Mr. 
Lincoln has ever spoken of Mr. Jefferson in the most kindly and respectful 
manner, holding him up as one of the ablest statesmen of his own or any other 
age, and constantly referring to him as one of the greatest apostles of freedom 
and free labor. This is so well known that any attempt, by means of fraud or 
forgery, to create the contrary impression, can only react upon the desperate 
politicians who are parties to such disreputable tactics." 

To George S. Lester 1 

George S. Lester, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: Sep. 5. 1860 

Your very kind letter of Aug. sist. is duly received, and, for 
which, I sincerely thank you. 

Please make my respects to Mr. Babcock & family. Yours truly 

A. 



1 ALS-P, ISLA. George S. Lester was a resident of New Haven, Connecticut, 
whom Lincoln doubtless met while stopping at the home of James F. Babcocfc 
in the fall of 1860. Lester's letter is not in the Lincoln Papers. 

To Alexander K. McCliire 1 

A. K. McClure, Esq., Springfield, Ills., Sept. 6, 1860 

My dear Sir: Inclosed I send you a copy of a letter from New 
York, stating a matter, which, if true, deeply concerns our inter- 

[112] 



SEPTEMBER Q, i860 

ests in Pennsylvania. The writer does not wash to be known; but 
some revelations of his in a former letter have subsequently been 
verified. Yours truly, A. 



1 Tracy, p. 162. McClure answered September 12 that he was aware of the 
danger indicated by Lincoln's unnamed correspondent a change in Democratic 
policy which is not specified but which vaguely implies an effort to split the 
Republican vote, perhaps by means of a deal with the Cameron clique who 
were at odds with the Curtin faction led by McClure. (RTL-DLC). See Lincoln 
to John M. Pomeroy, August 31, infra. 

To Charles C. Nott 1 

Charles C. Nott, Esq. Springfield Ills. Sep. 6. 1860 

My dear Sir Your note of the ist, with the accompanying 
sheets, reached me this morning. I have looked over the sheets 
hastily, and herewith return them. You perceive I have touched 
them only very lightly. The notes you add I have not attempted to 
compare with originals, leaving that entirely to you. I think the 
notes are exceedingly valuable. 

Before this reaches you, you will have received my letter in re- 
lation to "Abraham Baldwin." 2 

And now please accept for yourself, and present to the "Young 
Men's Republican Union" my grateful acknowledgements, for your 
and their exceeding kindness towards me in this matter. Yours 
very truly A. LINCOLN. 

1 AILS, IHi. Nott's letter of September i accompanied proof sheets of the new 
pamphlet printing of the address at Cooper Institute (DLC-RTL). See Lincoln 
to Nott, May 31, supra. 

2 Lincoln seems to imply that he had already written a letter about Abraham 
Baldwin in reply to Nott's query of August 28, concerning Baldwin. But the 
letter is not extant, and Nott's letter of September 17 indicates that he had not 
received it. Lincoln to Nott, September 22, infra, gives the substance of his 
reply. On August 28 Nott had written as follows: "... I have made no altera- 
tions other than those you sanctioned, except 

"i. I do not find that Abraham Baldwin voted on the Ordinance of '87. On 
the contrary he appears no* to have acted with Congress during the sitting of 
the Convention. Wm. Pierce seems to have taken his place then; and his name 
is recorded as voting for the Ordinance. ... I will therefore (unless you write 
to the contrary) strike out his name in that place and reduce the number from 
'four* to 'three* where you sum up the number of times he voted." (DLC-RTL) . 
Nott's corrections were allowed to stand. 

To Elihu B. Washbiirne 1 

Hon. E. B. Washburne Springfield, Ills. Sep. 9, 1860 

My dear Sir: Yours of the 5th. was received last evening. I was 
right glad to see it. It contains the freshest "posting" which I now 

[113] 



SEPTEMBER 1 O, i860 

have. It relieved me some from a little anxiety I had about Maine. 
Jo. Medill, on Aug. soth. wrote me that Coif ax had a letter from 
Mr. Hamlin saying we were in great danger of losing two mem- 
bers of Congress in Maine, and that your brother would not have 
exceeding 6000 majority for Governor. I addressed you at once, at 
Galena, asking for your latest information. As you are at Washing- 
ton, that letter you will receive some time after the Maine elec- 
tion. Yours very truly A. LINCOUNT 

1 ALS, owned by Hempstead Washburne, Chicago, Illinois. 

To Charles G. Wilson 1 

Charles G. Wilson, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Sep. 10. 1860 

Yours of the 6th. is just received. I have pleasure in assuring you 
that there is no great pressure upon me for the offices in prospect. 
If, as you say, the newspapers & leading politicians, are intent 
upon schemes for the obtaining of office, they do not bring them- 
selves within the range of my power to discourage them. Yours 
truly A. Lii^coLisr. 

1 ALS-F, Stan. V. Henkels Catalog 1430, April 24, 1929. The original letter 
has not been located. In the collection of R. E. Burdick of New York City is 
what purports to be the original of this letter. Comparison of the catalog fac- 
simile with a photostat of this manuscript, however, reveals that they cannot 
both be genuine. There is no letter from "Wilson, September 10, 1860, in the 
Lincoln Papers, but the New York Herald, January 17, 1861, in a dispatch from 
Springfield dated January 12, lists Charles G. Wilson of New York City as 
among Lincoln's callers. 

To James F. Babcock 1 

Hon James F. Babcock Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: Sep. 13. 1860 

Your two letters of the 8th., with newspaper slips, containing the 
proceedings of the Conn. Republican State Convention, and a con- 
sideration of our prospects in New- York, are received. 

The original of the picture you inclose, 2 and which I return, was 
taken from life, and is, I think, a very true one; though my wife, 
and many others, do not. My impression is that their objection 
arises from the disordered condition of the hair. My judgment is 
worth nothing in these matters. If your friend could procure one 
of the "heads" "busts" or whatever you call it, by Volk 3 at Chi- 
cago, I should think it the thing for him. Yours truly 

A. 

[114] 



S E P T E M B ER 1 4, 1 8 6 O 

1 ALS, DLC. 

2 The photograph preserved with the letter is one made by Alexander Hesler 
in Chicago, February, 1857 (Meserve No. 6). 

3 Leonard W. Volk, a young sculptor at Chicago for whom Lincoln sat in his 
spare time while attending court at Chicago in March, 1860. 



To James O. Putnam 1 

Hon. James O. Putnam Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Sep. 13. 1860 

Your short letter, with the newspaper containing your late ex- 
cellent speech at Rochester, was duly received, and for which I 
thank you sincerely. 

You must not lay much stress on the blunder about Mr. Adams; 
for I made a more mischievous one, in the first printed speech of 
mine, on the Slavery question Oct. 1 854 I stated that the prohi- 
bition of slavery in the North West Territory was made a condi- 
tion in the Virginia deed of cession while, in fact, it was not. Like 
yourself, I have since done what I could to correct the error. Yours 
very truly A. LHNTCOUNT. 

1 ALS-P, ISLA. Putnam wrote on September 8, following his speech at 
Rochester on September 7. Referring to Lincoln's letter of July 29, supra., he 
said, "That mistake in nay Lockport speech as to John Adams, was a great blun- 
der. After receiving your letter, a pamphlet edition of the speech was published 
& the error corrected." (DLC-BTL). 



To John Pettit 1 

Private 

Hon. John Pettit Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: Sep. 14. 1860 

Yours of the loth, is received. I have a good deal o news from 
New- York; but, of course, it is from friends., and is one-sided. They 
declare that no combination can deprive of us of [sz*c] the Empire 
State. It -would seem that assurances to this point could not be 
better than I have. And yet it may be delusive. 

If it would not be dishonorable, of which you can best judge, I 
wish you would name the sources of your information. Yours truly 

A. 



1 ALS, The Rosenbach Company, Philadelphia and New York. Chief Justice 
John Pettit of the U.S. Courts in Kansas Territory and former U.S. representa- 
tive (1843-1849) and senator (1853-1855) from Indiana, answered from Leav- 
enworth, Kansas, September 29, that he was much, relieved about news from 
New York (DLC-RTL). 

[115] 



To Nathaniel Grigsby 1 

Nathaniel Grigsby, Esq Springfield, Ills. Sep. 20, 1860 

My dear Sir: Your letter of July igth. was received only a few 
days ago, having been mailed by your brother 2 at Gentryville, la. 3 
on the i2th. of this month. A few days ago, Gov. Wood, of Quincy 
told me he saw you, and that you said you had written me. I had 
not then received your letter. 

Of our three families who removed from Indiana together, my 
father, Squire Hall, and John D. Johnston, are dead and all the 
rest of us are yet living. Of course the younger ones are grown up, 
marriages contracted, and new ones born. I have three boys now, 
the oldest of which is seventeen years of age. 

There is now a Republican electoral ticket in Missouri, so that 
you can vote for me if your neighbors will let you. I would advise 
you not to get into any trouble about it. Give my kindest regards to 
your brother Charles. 4 

Within the present year I have had two letters from John Gor- 
den, 5 who is living somewhere in Missouri, I forget exactly 
where and he says his father and mother are both still living 
near him. Yours very truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS-P, ISLA. Grigsby 's letter of July 19 Is not in the Lincoln Papers. He 
was a boyhood friend of Lincoln's in Spencer County, Indiana, who was living 
in Missouri at the time of the letter. 2 William Grigsby? 

3 Abbreviation for Indiana. 

4 Charles Grigsby had bought Thomas Lincoln's farm in 1830 when the Lin- 
coins left Indiana for Illinois. 

5 John Gorden wrote from Buffalo, Missouri, February 7 and June 15, 1860 
(DLC-RTL). 

To Edwin D, Morgan 1 

Hon. E. D. Morgan Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Sep. 20. 1860 

Yours of the i /th. is just received. Here, in Illinois, we are pre- 
cisely in the condition you seem to understand safe, as we think, 
on the National and State tickets, but in danger as to the Legisla- 
ture. How the National committee can do anything in the prem- 
ises I do not quite understand; tho, on this point I would refer to 
Mr. Judd. I shall confer with some friends, and write you again 
soon saying no more now thant [szc] that, in my opinion, no one 
thing will do us so much good in Illinois., as the carrying of In- 
diana at the October election. The whole surplus energy of the 
party throughout the nation, should be bent upon that object up 
to the close of that election. I should say the same of Pennsylvania, 

[116] 



SEPTEMBER 21, i860 

were it not that our assurances seem so abundant of Curtin's elec- 
tion there. 

If I might advise, I would say, bend all your energies upon In- 
diana now. Yours very truly A. 



1 ALS, N. Morgan's letter of September 17 asked for advice as to the situa- 
tion in Illinois. He had heard that the Republicans might not secure the legis- 
lature while carrying the electoral vote (DLC-RTL). 



To Nathan Sargent 1 

My dear Sir: Springfield, Ills. Sep. 20- 1860 

Your very kind letter of the i^th. was received yesterday; and 
I have just time to acknowledge it's receipt, and to say I thank you 
for it; and that I shall be pleased to hear from you again when- 
ever it is convenient for you to write. Yours very truly 
Hon. N. Sargent A 



1 ALS-P, ISLA. Sargent's letter of September 15 is not in the Lincoln Papers. 
He had been sergeant-at-arms of the House of Representatives during Lincoln's 
term in congress. 



To John Chrisman 1 

John Chrisman, Esq Springfield, Ills. Sep. 21 1860 

My dear Sir Yours of the 13th. was duly received. I have no 
doubt that you and I are related. My grand-father's Christian 
name was "Abraham." He had four brothers Isaac, Jacob, John 
& Thomas. They were born in Pennsylvania, and my grand-father, 
and some, if not all the others, in early life removed to Rocking- 
ham Co. Virginia. There my father named Thomas was born. 
From there my grand-father removed to Kentucky, and was killed 
by Indians, about the year 1784. His brother Thomas, who was 
my father's uncle also removed to Kentucky to Fayette Co. I 
think where, as I understand he lived, and died. I close, by re- 
peating, I have no doubt you and I are related. Yours very truly 

A. 



1 ALS, DLC-RTL. There are no letters from Chrisman in the Lincoln Papers, 
but an envelope postmarked "Waverly, Mo., March 15," containing Lincoln's 
letter of September 21, 1860, bears the following endorsement: "John Chrisman 
Mo. encloses an autograph letter of the President to him, and asks that his 
brother Jos. Chrisman, banished as a rebel, be allowed to return to Mo." Chris- 
man's letter was probably referred to the proper authority, but no trace of it 
has been found. John Chrisman, born at Linville, Virginia, was the son of 
Joseph Chrisman and Elizabeth Lincoln (daughter of Jacob who -was the 
brother of Lincoln's grandfather Abraham). 

[117] 



To Mrs. M. J. Green 1 

Mrs. M. J. Green Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Madam. Sep. 22. 1860 

Your kind congratulatory letter, of August, was received in due 
course and should have been answered sooner. The truth is I 
have never corresponded much with ladies; and hence I postpone 
writing letters to them, as a business which I do not understand. 
I can only say now I thank you for the good opinion you express 
of me, fearing, at the same time, I may not be able to maintain it 
through life. Yours very truly , A. LIMCOLFT. 

lALS, CSmH. There is no letter from Mrs. M. J, Green in the Lincoln 
Papers, and efforts to identify her have been unsuccessful. 

To Anson G. Henry 1 

Springfield, Ills. Sep. 22. 1860 

Dear Doctor Yours of July i8th. was received some time ago. 
When you wrote, you had not learned the result of the Democratic 
conventions at Charleston & [Bajltimore. With the two tickets in 
the field I should think it possible for our friends to carry Oregon. 
But the general result, I think, does not depend upon Oregon. No 
one, this side of the mountains, pretends that any ticket can be 
elected by the People, unless it be ours. Hence great efforts to com- 
bine against us, are being made, which, however, as yet, have not 
had much success. 

Besides what we see in the newspapers, I have a good deal of 
private correspondence; and, without giving details, I will only 
say, it all looks very favorable to our success. 

Make my best respects to Mrs. H. and the rest of your family. 
Your friend as ever A. LINCOLN 

i ALS-P, ISLA. 

To Charles C. Nott 1 

Charles C. Nott, Esq., Springfield, Ills., Sept. 22, 1860. 

My Dear Sir: Yours of the 17th was duly received. The 250 
copies have not yet arrived. I am greatly obliged to you for what 
you have done, and what you propose to do. 

The "Abraham Baldwin letter" in substance was that I could 
not find the Journal of the Confederation Congress for the session 
at which was passed the Ordinance of 1787 and that in stating 
Mr. Baldwin had voted for its passage, I had relied on a communi- 

[118] 



SEPTEMBER 22, i860 

cation of Mr. Greeley, over his own signature, published in the 
New York Weekly Tribune of October 15, 1859. If you will turn 
to that paper, you will there see that Mr. Greeley apparently 
copies from the Journal, and places the name of Mr. Baldwin 
among those of the men who voted for the measure. 

Still, if the Journal itself shows differently, of course it is right. 
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN. 

1 George H. Putnam, Abraham Lincoln: The People's Leader (1909), pp. 
229-30. Nott's letter of September 17 specified that "the 'Abraham Baldwin 
letter' referred to in your last I regret to say has not arrived. From your not 
touching the proofs in that regard, I inferred (and hope) that the correction 
was not itself an error." (DLC-RTL). See Lincoln to Nott, September 6, supra. 

To G. Yoke Tarns 1 

Private & confidential 
G. Yoke Tarns, Esq Springfield, Ills Sep. 22. 1860 

My dear Sir: Your letter asking me "Are you in favor of a 
Tariff & Protection to American Industry?" is received. The con- 
vention which nominated me, by the 1 2th. plank of their platform, 
selected their position on this question; and I have declared my 
approval of the platform, and accepted the nomination. Now, if 
I were to publicly shift this position, by adding or subtracting any- 
thing, the convention would have the right, and probably would 
be inclined, to displace me as their candidate. And I feel confident 
that you, on reflection, would not wish me to give private assur- 
ances to be seen by some, and kept secret from others. 

I enjoin that this shall, by no means be made public. Yours 
Respectfully A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS copy, DLC-RTL. Entirely in Lincoln's handwriting, the manuscript 
appears to be a copy retained by Lincoln for his file. G. Yoke Tarns wrote from 
Manayunk, Pennsylvania, September 15, "I take the liberty of asking you one 
plain question. Are you in favour of a Tarriff & Protection to American In- 
dustry. . . ." (DLC-RTL). 

To John Van Dyke 1 

Hon. John Van Dyke Springfield, Ills, 

My dear Sir: Sep. 22. 1860 

Your very kind letter of the i /th. is duly received; and for which 
I sincerely thank you. Hon. Moses Hampton 2 has written me one 
under similar circumstances, he now being a Judge at Pittsburgh. 

Please make my best respects to Mrs. V. D. of whom I have very 
pleasant recollections. Yours very truly A. 

[119] 



S E P T E M B ER 24, 1 8 6 O 

1ALS-P, ISLA. John Van Dyke was judge of the New Jersey Supreme 
Court. His letter of September 17 is not in the Lincoln Papers 

2 Moses Hampton, Whig congressman from Pennsylvania 1847-1851, and an 
admirer of Lincoln's abilities as raconteur during their acquaintance in Con- 
gress, wrote a letter of congratulations on May 23 (DLC-RTL), but no later 
letter is in the Lincoln Papers. 

To John T. Hanks 1 

Dear John Springfield, Ills. Sep. 24, 1860 

Your letter of July 22 was received a few days ago. If your 
Father and Mother desire you to come home, it is a delicate matter 
for me to advise you not to do it. Still, as you ask my advice, it is 
that if you are doing well, you better stick to it. If you have a good 
start there, and should give it up, you might not get it again, here, 
or elsewhere. It can not be other than their first wish that you shall 
do well. 

And now, as to politics, I am very much obliged to you for what 
you offer to do for me in Oregon. This side of the Rocky Mountains 
things appear reasonably well for the general result. In opposing 
David Logan, at the late congressional election in Oregon, I sup- 
pose you did what you thought was right; and when a man does 
what he thinks is right, he does the best he can. Still, I am sorry 
you did not think differently, as I knew David from his childhood, 
and he studied law in our office when his father and I were part- 
ners. 

I heard from our relations over at Charleston, about three weeks 
ago, and they were well then. 

Write me again when you receive this. Your Uncle 

A. 



1 ALS-P, ISLA. John T. Hanks, the son of Dennis F. Hanks, had migrated to 
California and later to Oregon. Writing from Canyon ville, Oregon, July 22, he 
reviewed Oregon politics and his personal affairs (DLC-RTL) . 

To Francis E. Spinner 1 

Hon. F. E. Spinner Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: Sep. 24. 1860 

Yours of the igth. was received in due course, the Bag of books 
having been received two days before. I am much obliged for 
both the books and the letter. 

You are right in the suspicion that our foes are now driving at 
Pennsylvania; but our friends there are fully apprized of this, and 
say they can and will repulse them. Yours very truly 

A. 

[120] 



SEPTEMBER 26, i860 

1 ALS, owned by H. K. Crofoot, Moravia, New York. Francis E. Spinner 
wrote that he had sent a bag containing the first ten volumes of the "Pacific 
Rail Road Survey Report" and would send the supplement, not yet received, at 
a later date (DLC-RTL) . See also Lincoln to Spinner, July 27, supra. 



To John M. Brockman 1 

J. M. Brockman, Esq Springfield, Ills. Sep. 25. 1860 

Dear Sir- Yours of the 24th. asking "the best mode of obtaining 
a thorough knowledge of the law" is received. The mode is very 
simple, though laborious, and tedious. It is only to get the books, 
and read, and study them carefully. Begin with Blackstone's Com- 
mentaries, and after reading it carefully through, say twice, take 
up Chitty's Pleading, Greenleaf's Evidence, & Story's Equity &c. 
in succession. \Vork, work, work, is the main thing. Yours very 
truly A. 



1 ALS, owned by Mrs. Ida Brockman Cornelius, Humboldt, Nebraska. Brock- 
man's letter is not in the Lincoln Papers. He was a young school teacher of 
Pleasant Plains, Illinois, whose plans for studying law were abandoned after 
he had moved to Brownville, Nebraska, and enlisted in the Fifth Iowa Cavalry. 
Following the Civil War he settled in Nebraska as a farmer and stockman and 
later served two terms in the state legislature. 

To Benjamin F. James 1 

B. F. James, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Sep. 26. 1860 

I have now had your kind letter for near a month, without an- 
swering it. Nor have I much to communicate, even now, beyond, 
what you know quite as well as I, by the public prints. So far as I 
have private information, the prospect for the election looks quite 
encouraging. 

Please make my respects to Mrs. J. and Louis; and also to your 
Father. Your friend as ever A. LirsrcoLisr 

1 ALS, IHi. See Lincoln to James, August 31, supra. Lincoln may have for- 
gotten that he had acknowledged James' letter of congratulation. 

To Nehemiah D. Sperry 1 

N. D. Sperry, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: Sep. 26. 1860 

Yours of the igth. is duly received; and for which I sincerely 
thank you. 

My intelligence from Penn. & from the whole field, is very 

[121] 



SEPTEMBER 27, i860 

much the same as you seem to have. As to my forgiving you for 
detaining me last Spring, I certainly do not hold you, and the Re- 
publicans of Connecticut, my debtors in anything. Yours very truly 



A. 

i ALS, CSmH. Sperry's letter of September 19 is not in the Lincoln Papers. 
A former Know-Nothing who had become a Republican, he was appointed 
postmaster at New Haven, Connecticut, in 1861 and remained in office until 
1886. He was a member of the Republican National Committee during Lin- 
coln's administration and served eight terms as U.S. representative beginning 
in 1886. 

To James E. Harvey 1 

(Private.} 

Springfield, 111., September 27, 1860. 

My dear Sir: Yesterday I was gratified by the receipt of yours of 
the 22d. There is no reality in that suspicion about Judge Kelley. 
Neither he nor any other man has obtained or sought such a rela- 
tion with me. Yours very truly, A. LiisrcoLiNr. 

1 NH, VI, 59. Harvey's letter of September 22 gave political news, includ- 
ing a rumor that Judge William D. Kelley, Democratic candidate for congress 
". . . was represented to be the personal exponent of your views & wishes, & 
in the event of success would be so regarded.** (DLC-RTL.) . See Lincoln to 
Kelley, October 13, infra. 

To George B. Lincoln 1 

G. B. Lincoln, Esq., Springfield, 111., 

My dear Sir: Sept 27, 1860 

Yours of the 22nd with the accompanying presents, by the hand 
of Mr. Alvey, is received. They are all good and one is a great 
curiosity. Please accept nay sincere thanks for them. Yours very 
truly A LiKrcoLr<r. 

1 Copy, ISL.A. Specifying that ne was not related, George B. Lincoln of New 
York City wrote on September 22 that he was sending "By the kindness of 
your worthy neighbour Mr. Alvey who is returning to Springfield ... as a 
present to your Boys a few specimens the [campaign] medals .... a small 
unique Photograph . . . also for the Boys and for Mrs. Lincoln the larger 
Photograph under glass. . . .'* (DILC-B.TL.) . James W. Alvey was a traveling 
salesman living at Springfield. 

To Daniel E Gardner 1 

Professor Gardner Springfield, Ills. 

Dear Sir: Sep. 28. 1860 

Some specimens of your Soap have been used at our house and 
Mrs. L. declares it is a superb article. She at the same time, pro- 

[122] 



SEPTEMBER 2 Q., i860 

tests that / have never given sufficient attention to the "soap ques- 
tion" to be a competent judge. Yours truly A. 



1 ALS-F, Genuine Autograph Letters from the Most Distinguished Men of 
Our Country, Presented to Prof. Gardner., the New England Soap Man (1870). 
"Professor" Daniel Pierce Gardner was an itinerant soap manufacturer and 
vendor who distributed his wares by means of humorous lectures to which the 
purchase of a bar of soap was the price of admission. He claimed to be "a lineal 
descendant, in an an* line, of that glorious Puritan, Awful Gardner, who landed 
on the everlasting hills of New England from a desolate fishing smack . , . ." 
presumably referring to Thomas Gardner (1592?- 1677), o ne of a number of 
fishermen who established in 1624 a settlement at the mouth of the Naumkeag 
Biver which later became Salem, Massachusetts (see Frank A. Gardner, Gard- 
ner Memorial, A Biographical and Genealogical Record .... 1933; and Jo- 
seph B. Felts, Annals of Salem, 2, vols., 1845-1849). Although Daniel P. Gard- 
ner was announced in the Illinois State Journal (September 28, 1860) as a 
professor of Brown University, he is not of record at that institution. 



Dialogue between Stephen A. Douglas and 
John C. Breckinridge 1 

Louisville, Ky Sep. 29. 1860 
Meeting & Dialogue of Douglas & Breckenridge 

DOUG Well, you have succeeded in breaking up the Democratic 
party. 

BRECK. Certainly, for the time being, the party is under a cloud, 
to say the least; but why you should say / did it, I do not com- 
prehend. 

DOUG Perhaps I should charge it to your supporters, rather than 
to you. 

BRECK The blame, as I conceive, is neither upon my friends or 
me. 

DOUG They insisted on having a plat-form, upon "which I could 
not stand. 

BRECK: Aye, and you insisted on having a platform upon which 
they could not stand. 

DOUG But mine was the true Democratic platform. 

BRECK: That presents the exact point in dispute; my friends in- 
sist that theirs is the true Democratic platform. 

D OUG Let us argue it, then. 

BRECK: I conceive that argument is exhausted; you certainly 
could advance nothing new, and / know not that I could. There 
is, however, a colatteral point, upon which I would like the ex- 
change of a f ew words. 

DOUG What is it? 

[123] 



OCTOBER 1, i860 

BRECK It is this: We insisted on Congressional protection of 
Slave property in the national teritories; and you broke with 
us professedly because of this. 

DOUG Exactly so; I insisted upon non-intervention. 

BRECK And yet you are forming coalitions, wherever you can, 
with Bell, who is for this very congressional protection of slav- 
ery f or the very thing which you pretend, drove you from us 
for Bell, with all his Know-Nothingism, and anti-democracy of 
every sort. 

DOUG Bell is a good Union-man; and you, and your friends, are 
a set of disunionists. 

BRECK. Bah! You have known us long, and intimately; why did 
you never denounce us as disunionists, till since our refusal to 
support you for the Presidency? Why have you never warned 
the North against our disunion schemes, till since the Charleston 
and Baltimore sessions of the National convention? Will you an- 
swer, Senator Douglas? 

DOUG The condition of my throat will not permit me to carry 
this conversation any further. 

1 AD, DLC-RTL Lincoln's jeu d'esprit, written, in pencil, was probably sug- 
gested by Douglas' speech at Louisville, September 29, in which Douglas made 
the points included in Lincoln's imaginary dialogue. 

To Moses Fowler 1 

Moses Fowler, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Oct. i. 1860 

This introduces our friend Hon. S. A. Hurlbut, one of our best 
Illinois Republican Speakers. It happens oppertunely that he can 
be with you, at Lafayette, on the 5th. Inst. Yours very truly 

A. 



^ALS, owned by Cecil Fowler, Lafayette, Indiana. Moses Fowler was a 
prominent Republican in the mercantile and banking business at Lafayette, In- 
diana. 

To James H. Reed 1 

J. H. Reed, Esq Springfield, Ills. Oct. i. 1860 

My dear Sir Yours of Sep. 2ist. was received some time ago; 
but I could not, till now, find time to answer it. I never was in 
McDonough county till 1858. I never said anything derogatory of 
Mr. Jefferson, in McDonough county, or elsewhere. About three 
weeks ago, 2 for the first time in my life, did I ever see, or hear, the 

[124] 



OCTOBER 2, i860 

language, attributed to me, as having been, used towards Mr. 
Jefferson; and then it was sent to me, as you now send, in order 
that I might say whether it came from me. I never used any such 
language at any time You may rely on the truth of this; although 
it is my wish that you do not publish it. Yours truly 

A. 



1 ALS, ORB. Reed's letter of September 21, is not in the Lincoln Papers. He 
was co-publisher with Horace Bigelow of the Aledo, Illinois, Record. 

2 See Lincoln to Anson G. Chester, September 5, supra. 



To James E. Harvey 1 

(Private and confidential*} 

October 2, 1860. 

My dear Sir: To comply with your request to furnish extracts 
from my tariff speeches is simply impossible, because none of those 
speeches were published. It was not fashionable here in those days 
to report one's public speeches. In 1844 I was on the Clay electoral 
ticket in this State (i.e., Illinois) and, to the best of my ability, 
sustained, together, the tariff of 1842 and the tariff plank of the 
Clay platform. 2 This could be proven by hundreds perhaps 
thousands of living witnesses; still it is not in print, except by 
inference. The WHhig papers of those years all show that I was 
upon the electoral ticket; even though I made speeches, among 
other things about the tariff, but they do not show ivhat I said 
about it. The papers show that I was one of a committee which re- 
ported, among others, a resolution in these words: 

"That we are in favor of an adequate revenue on duties from 
imports so levied as to afford ample protection to American in- 
dustry." 

But, after all, was it really any more than the tariff plank of our 
present platform? And does not my acceptance pledge me to that? 
And am I at liberty to do more, if I were inclined? Yours truly, 

A. 



1 NH, VI, 61-62. Harvey's letter of September 25 referred to the visit of 
James Leslie, Jr , as correspondent of Harvey's paper, the North American 
and U.S. Gazette (see Lincoln to Cameron, August 6, supra) and his search 
for newspaper reports of Lincoln's speeches of 1844: "It is of very great im- 
portance to us, to have extracts from these speeches, as pointed as possible, with 
the dates and attending circumstances. . . ." (DLC-RTL). 

2 Vide supra, June 19, 1844. See also the reports of Lincoln's speech at Sugar 
Creek, March i, 1844, and his debates with John Calhoun and Alfred W. 
Cavarly, March 20-25, 1844, supra. These reports are so fragmentary and bi- 
ased that even if Lincoln knew of them he would scarcely have used them. 

[125] 



To Jesse W. FeU 1 

[Hon. J. W. Fell.] Springfield, 

My dear Sir Oct. 5. 1860 

Yours, inclosing the letter I now return, was duly received, and 
for which I sincerely thank you. Our friends all understand, as 
you do, the importance of carrying one of the three Districts you 
mention. Whatever can be will be done. [Yours very truly 

A. LINCOLN] 

1 ALS, DLC. The bracketed portions of this letter have been clipped and 
pasted at the end of the autobiographical sketch sent to Fell with the letter 
of December 20, 1859 (q..v., supra). Fell's letter is not in the Lincoln Papers. 

To William H. Herndon 1 

Springfield Ills Oct. loth 1860 

Dear William: I cannot give you details, but it is entirely cer- 
tain that Pennsylvania and Indiana have gone Republican very 
largely, Penn 25,000 & Indiana 5 to 10. Ohio of course is safe. 
Yours as ever A. Liisrcorjxr. 

1 Copy, DLC-HW. Herndon sent the copy to Jesse W. Weik and added the 
following explanation, here somewhat abridged: "The history of the letter is 
as follows. I was making a speech for Lincoln in Petersburg on the evening 
of Oct. loth and had fairly got into the spirit of the hour when some one 
rushed into the court room and handed me the letter. I, at first, thought that 
it might contain sad news from my family. I opened the letter and read it 
over to myself before reading to the people and then I read it aloud to the 
crowd. I never finished that speech. The crowd yelled screamed threw up 
their hats ran out of doors made bonfires &c. &c. ... I gave the letter 
in *8i to a Mr. Parker, President of the Englewood soldiers memorial associa- 
tion near Chicago. . . ." 

To William H. Seward 1 

Hon. W. H. Seward. Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Oct. 12. 1860 

Your kind note of the 8th. is received. I am quite satisfied with 
what you said, at Chicago., upon the point I mentioned to you; 
and I am much obliged to you for saying it. I hope it did not give 
you much trouble weaving it into the general web of your dis- 
course. 

I shall look up the speech made at DuBuque and published in 
the N.Y. Times. 

I have had no fears of New- York recently; though, of course, 
I am glad to have the expression of your continued confidence. It 
now really looks as if the Government is about to fall into our 

[126] 



OCTOBER 13, i860 

hands. Pennsylvania, Ohio., and Indiana have surpassed all expec- 
tation, even the most extravagant. Most sincerely Your friend 

A. LIJNTCOIJN* 

1 ALS, NAuE. On October 8, Seward wrote Lincoln from Auburn, New- 
York: 

"I do not know how successfully I met your wishes in what I said at Chi- 
cago on the point you indicated to me. I was less fully reported on that point 
than I spoke. But I find a report of my speech at Dubuque in the N. York 
Times in which the subject which had given you uneasiness was presented 
freely and strongly. 

"We arrived here on Saturday night and I find no reason to doubt this 
State will redeem all the promises we have made. . . .** (DLC-B.TL.) . 

Seward spoke at Dubuque, Iowa, on September 21. 



To William D. Kelley 1 

Private 

Hon. William D. Kelly Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: Oct 13. 1860 

Yours of the 6th. asking permission to inscribe your new legal 
work to me, is received. Gratefully accepting the proffered honor, 
I give the leave, begging only that the inscription may be in mod- 
est terms, not representing me as a man of great learning, or a 
very extraordinary one in any respect. Yours very truly 

A. 



i ALS, owned by A. H. Greenly, Hoboken, New Jersey. William D. Kelley, 
judge of the Court of Common Pleas at Philadelphia (1846-1856) and later U.S. 
representative from Pennsylvania (1861-1890) asked Lincoln's permission 
to inscribe his two-volume work on international law. 



To John M. Read 1 

Hon. John. M. Read Springfield 111 

Dear Sir Oct 13th 1860. 

The box containing the tw6 framed engravings, sent me by 
yourself., came safely to hand. Please to accept my thanks for the 
same. 

We are indulging in much rejoicing over the late splendid vic- 
tories in Pennsylvania, Indiana, and Ohio, which seem to fore- 
shadow the certain success of the Republican cause in November. 
Yours Truly A. LUSTGOLI^ 

i LS, DLC-Read Papers. The letter is in Nicolay's handwriting except for the 
signature. The engravings mentioned were by the artist John Sartain. See 
Lincoln to Read, August 27, supra. 

[127] 



To L. Montgomery Bond 1 

PRIVATE 

L. Montgomery Bond, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: Oct- 15. 1860 

Yours of the ist. has been at hand some days You ask "In the 
event of your election to the Presidency, and of the election of a 
majority of Republicans to the next congress would you counte- 
nance radicalism to the extent of embittering the feelings of our 
Southern bretheren." I certainly am in no temper, and have no 
purpose, to embitter the feelings of the South; but whether I am 
inclined to such a course as would, in fact, embitter their feelings, 
you can better judge by my published speeches, than by anything I 
would say in a short letter, if I were inclined now, as I am not, 
to define my position anew. Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS-P, I SLA. Lewis Montgomery Bond was a tea merchant at Philadel- 
phia who had formerly been in business in New Orleans. His letter is not in the 
Lincoln Papers. 

The Canal-Scrip Fraud 1 

[c. October 16, 1860] 

It is now less than three weeks to the election. For months we 
have been trying to get an unequivocal declaration from demo- 
cratic newspaper's and democratic candidates for the Legislature, 
whether it is, or is not their purpose, at the next session, to release 
Gov Matteson from the payment of the money obtained by him 
through the canal script-fraud. But we have tried in vain. There 
is nothing left for us, but an appeal to the tax-payers. We say to 
them "it is your business." By your votes you can hold him to it, 
or you can release him." "Every year a part of the price of all 
you sell, from beef -cat tie down, to butter and eggs, is wrung from 
you in gold, to replenish a State Treasury" "To a certain extent, 
this is indispensable; but it is for you to say whether it shall be 
thus wrung from you to be litterally stolen, and applied to es- 
tablishing banks, and building palaces for nabobs." "Will you at- 
tend to it?" 

Several years ago, the Auditor sold certain state lands, receiving 
therefor, as the law required, certain internal improvement script. 
This script was deposited with the then Governor, not being can- 
celled, or destroyed. Recently it has been discovered that a portion 
of this script has found it's way out of the Governor's custody, to 
New- York, where it has been funded and State bonds issued for it 

[128] 



OCTOBER 1 Q., i860 

payable to Peter O Strang. Thus this script was once paid for with 
state lands, and then again with State bonds. But this is not the end. 
The bonds are brought to the Treasury here, and bought in with 
the gold of the tax-payers. One Lowe brings them and gets the gold 
for them. It turns out that the bonds are filled up in this Lowe's 
handwriting, and then transferred from Peter O Strang to Lowe, 
also in Lowe's handwriting. Who is Peter O. Strang^ and how he 
got the script out of the Governor's custody, to treat it as his own, 
get State bonds for it, nobody seems to know. But this much is 
known. Matteson was Governor when the script may have gone 
from the executive custody, and Lowe was his agent at New- York, 
to fill up state bonds in rightful cases. Only a few days ago Lowe 
was in Springfield, and a suit was commenced against him for the 
money obtained from the State on the bonds. For a time the Sher- 
iff could not find him; but at last he was found concealed in Mat- 
teson's house. And this too, after the Sheriff had been once turned 
away from the house, by Matteson himself. 

1 ADf, DLC-RTL. The Illinois State Journal editorialized numerous times 
during the weeks prior to the election concerning the discovery of "redeemed 
coupons and canal scrip, in large quantities, funded fraudulently" {Journal., 
September 20, 1860). Although in July, 1859, a grand jury had failed to find 
a true bill against ex-Governor Joel A. Matteson in connection with the pur- 
ported fraud, the discovery of further irregularities in September, 860, was 
made a political issue by the Republican press. Perhaps the present manuscript 
was intended as an article for the Journal or another Republican organ. If so 
the editors have not been able to locate it in print. Quite likely Lincoln thought 
better of using it at all and merely filed it away. The date [Oct. 1854?] as- 
signed to the document in the Lincoln Papers cannot be supported. 

To Grace Bedell 1 

Private 

Miss. Grace Bedell Springfield, Ills. 

My dear little Miss. Oct 19. 1860 

Your very agreeable letter of the 15th. is received. 

I regret the necessity of saying I have no daughters. I have three 
sons one seventeen, one nine, and one seven, years of age. They, 
with their mother, constitute my whole family. 

As to the whiskers, having never worn any, do you not think 
people would call it a piece of silly affection if I were to begin it 
now? Your very sincere well-wisher A. Liisrcousr. 

1 ALS, owned by H. D. Billings, Delphos, Kansas. The original letter to 
which Lincoln replied, now owned by George Dondero, Royal Oak, Michigan, 
is an historic document that the editors can scarcely do otherwise than repro- 
duce in full: 

[129] 



OCTOBER 23, i860 

N Y 

Hon A B Lincoln Westfield Chatauque Co 

Dear Sir Oct 15. 1860 

My father has just home from the fair and 

brought home your picture and Mr. Hamlin's. I am a little girl only eleven 
years old, but want you should be President of the United States very much 
so I hope you wont think me very bold to write to such a great man as you 
are. Have you any little girls about as large as I am if so give them my love 
and tell her to write to me if you cannot answer this letter. I have got 4 
brother's and part of them will vote for you any way and if you will let your 
whiskers grow I will try and get the rest of them to vote for you you would 
look a great deal better for your face is so thin. All the ladies like whiskers and 
they would tease their husband's to vote for you and then you would be 
President. My father is a going to vote for you and if I was a man I would 
vote for you to but I will try and get every one to vote for you that I can 
I think that rail fence around your picture makes it look very pretty I have 
got a little baby sister she is nine weeks old and is just as cunning as can be. 
When you direct your letter dir[e]ct to Grace Bedell Westfield Chatauque 
County New York 

I must not write any more answer this letter right off Good bye 

Grace Bedell 

To William S. Speer 1 

Confidential. 
Win. S. Speer Esq Springfield, 111. Oct aad 1860. 

My dear Sir Yours of the 13th "was duly received. I appreciate 
your motive when you suggest the propriety of my writing for 
the public something disclaiming all intention to interfere with 
slaves or slavery in the States; but in my judgment, it would do 
no good. I have already done this many many, times; and it is 
in print, and open to all who will read. Those who will not read, 
or heed, what I have already publicly said, would not read, or heed, 
a repetition of it. 

"If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be 
persuaded though one rose from the dead." Yours Truly 

A. LI3NTCOL3N" 

1 Copy, DLC-RTL. Speer's letter of October 13 is not in the Lincoln Papers, 
but later letters from him are written from Shelbyville, Tennessee. He had 
bought a printing press and ". . . for three months . . . worked day and night 
to ascertain, to help form, and to correct public opinion." (Speer to Lincoln, 
December 24, 1860, DLC-RTL). 

To David Turnham 1 

David Turnham, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

My dear old friend: Oct. 23. 1860 

Your kind letter of the 1 7th. is received. I am indeed very glad 
to learn you are still living and well, I well remember when you 

[130] 



OCTOBER 24, i860 

and I last met, after a separation of fourteen years, at the cross- 
road voting place, in the fall of 1844. It is now sixteen years more 
and we are both no longer young men. I suppose you are a grand- 
father; and I, though married much later in life, have a son nearly 
grown. 

I would much like to visit the old home, and old friends of my 
boyhood, but I fear the chance for doing so soon, is not very good. 
Your friend & sincere well-wisher A. LINCOLN" 

1 ALS, Evansville Public Museum, Evansville, Indiana. This letter is mis- 
dated November 19, 1860, in Hertz, II, 792. David Turnham was an old friend 
and neighbor of the Lincolns in Spencer County, Indiana, whom Lincoln had 
last seen, November 4, 1844, on his visit to Indiana. Turnham's letter is not 
in the Lincoln Papers. 

Guarantee to Pay Freight Charges for a Lady 1 

Springfield, Oct. 24. 1860 

The lady-bearer of this, says she has freight at the depot, which 
she can not get without four dollars. If this be correct, let her have 
the freight, and I will pay you any amount not exceeding four 
dollars on presentation of this note A. 



1 ADS, DLC-RTL. The document bears at bottom the receipt dated October 
2.Q and signed by (Edward B.) Egbert, clerk at the Great Western Railroad 
freight office. There is no conjecture as to the lady's identity. 

To J. C. Lee 1 

Confidential 

J. C. Lee, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

Dear Sir Oct. 24, 1860 

Yours of the 14th. was received some days ago, and should have 
been answered sooner. 

I never gave fifty dollars, nor one dollar, nor one cent, for the 
object you mention, or any such object. 

I once subscribed tv^entyfive dollars, to be paid whenever Judge 
Logan would decide it was necessary to enable the people of Kan- 
sas to defend themselves against any force coining against them 
from without the Territory, and not by authority of the United 
States. Logan never made the decision, and I never paid a dollar 
on the subscription. The whole of this can be seen in the files of the 
Illinois Journal, since the first of June last. Yours truly 

A. LI3NTCOL3ST 

1 ALS, RPB. J. C. Lee's letter of October 14, 1860, is not in the Lincoln Pa- 
pers, but it seems probable that he was John C. Lee, president of the Young 
Men's Republican Association of Jacksonville, Illinois. It also seems probable 

[131] 



OCTOBER 2 6., i860 

that the subject of his letter to Lincoln was the charge that Lincoln had con- 
tributed money to John Brown's cause, which Democrats were using against 
Lincoln in the campaign. 

To H. E. Hoelke 1 

H. E. Hoelke, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Oct. 26. 1860 

Yours of the 25th. accompanied by the likenesses of Hon: T. H. 
Benton, Hon. Edward Bates, and Hon. F. P. Blair, Jr, and also the 
Photograph of my residence, is duly to hand, and for all which, 
please accept my thanks. Yours very truly A. LINCOLN. 

1 ALS, IHL H. E. Hoelke was a photographer at St. Louis, Missouri. 

To David Hunter 1 

Private & confidential 
Maj. David Hunter: Springfield, Ills. Oct. 26. 1860 

My dear Sir: Your very kind letter of the soth. was duly re- 
ceived, and for which, please accept my thanks. 

I have another letter from a writer unknown to me, saying the 
officers of the Army at Fort Kearney, have determined, in case of 
Republican success, at the approaching Presidential election, to 
take themselves, and the arms at that point, South, for the purpose 
of resistance to the government. While I think there are many 
chances to one that this is a hum-bug, it occurs to me that any 
real movement of this sort in the army would leak out and be- 
come known to you. In such case, if it would not be unprofessional, 
or dishonorable (of which you are to be judge) I shall be much 
obliged if you will apprize me of it. Yours very truly 

A. 



1 ALS, CSmH. Major David Hunter, stationed at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, 
wrote on October 20 that on a visit East he had received a report that a num- 
ber of young men in Virginia had bound themselves "by oaths most solemn" 
to assassinate Lincoln if he were elected. Granting the absurdity of the report, he 
warned Lincoln to remember that "on *the institution* these good people are 
most certainly demented. . . ." (DLC-RTL). 

To George T. M. Davis 1 

Private <& confidential. 

Geo. T. M. Davis, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: Oct. 27. 1860 

Mr. Dubois has shown me your letter of the soth.; and I prom- 
ised him to write you. What is it I could say which would quiet 

[132] 



OCTOBER 2 8 5 i860 

alarm? Is it that no interference by the government, with slaves or 
slavery within the states, is intended? I have said this so often 
already, that a repetition of it is but mockery, bearing an appear- 
ance of weakness, and cowardice, which perhaps should be avoided. 
Why do not uneasy men read what I have already said? and what 
our platform says? If they will not read, or heed, then [these?], 
would they read, or heed, a repetition of them? Of course the dec- 
laration that there is no intention to interfere with slaves or slav- 
ery, in the states, with all that is fairly implied in such declara- 
tion, is true; and I should have no objection to make, and repeat 
the declaration a thousand times, if there were no danger of en- 
couraging bold bad men to believe they are dealing with one who 
can be scared into anything. 

I have some reason to believe the Sub-National committee, at the 
Astor House, may be considering this question; and if their judg- 
ment should be different from mine, mine might be modified by 
theirs. Yours very truly A. 



1 AL.S, IHi. Davis was an old friend who had practiced law at Alton in the 
iSso's and following a distinguished career in the War with Mexico and 
later in the War department had become a prominent New York businessman. 
His letter to Jesse K. Dubois reported a plan hatching in New York and various 
Southern cities to cause a general money and stock panic in the event of Lin- 
coln's election. He suggested that leading merchants write a public letter to 
Lincoln, who in his reply would give such assurances as would block the move- 
ment (DLC-RTL). His reply of October 31, admitted that Lincoln could say 
nothing more than he had already said, but insisted that repeating it as presi- 
dent-elect would carry weight and would not be regarded as cowardice or 
timidity (DLC-RTL). See also Lincoln to Truman Smith, November 10, infra. 



To Richard W. Thompson 1 

Hon R. W. Thompson Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Oct. 28. 1860. 

Your very acceptable letter of the 2Oth sent by Express, was re- 
ceived only yesterday. I am indeed grateful for your generous 
course towards me so far; and I doubt not what you are doing, and 
will do, to the end of the contest is, and will be, the most judicious. 

Your suggestions are all worthy of consideration, and shall re- 
ceive it. The eyes of some of our best sentinels are already upon 
that matter of forged naturalization papers to be issued as from 
your court; and, if possible, the use of such papers will be pre- 
vented. Yours very truly A. LusrcoLr*. 

1 Hertz, II, 788. Thompson's letter of October 20 is not in the Lincoln Papers. 

[133] 



To Mrs. Eliza A. Hamilton 1 

Mrs. E. A. Hamilton Springfield, Ills. Oct. 29. 1860 

Your very kind letter of the igth. was received a few days ago. 
Your Father 2 calls on me almost every day, and I have mentioned 
your letter to him, and presented your affectionate regards, as re- 
quested. Your sister, Mrs. Johnston, 3 I have not seen since receiv- 
ing your letter. 

The health of my family & self, for which you kindly inquire, 
is reasonably good. Please present my respects to your good hus- 
band. Yours very truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, IHi. Eliza Ann Hamilton was the wife of Reverend John, A. Hamil- 
ton of Keene, New Hampshire. 

2 Erastus Wright, who was a land and general agent in partnership with 
his son-in-law, Robert P. Johnston, at Springfield. 

s Mrs. Robert P. Johnston (Maria Jane Wright). 

To Mrs. Stephen A. Hurlbut 1 

Mrs. S. A. Hurlbutt Springfield, Ills., 

My dear Madam Oct. 29, 1860 

Your good Husband, who is making speeches for us in this 
county, has desired me to write you that he is well, which I take 
great pleasure in doing. I will add, too, that he is rendering us very 
efficient service. Yours very truly A. LINCOLN 

i ALS, RPB. 

To George D. Prentice 1 

(Copy) Private & confidential 

Geo. D. Prentice, Esq Springfield, Ills. Oct. 29. 1860 

My dear Sir: Yours of the 2 6th. is just received. Your suggestion 
that I, in a certain event, shall write a letter, setting forth my 
conservative views and intentions, is certainly a very worthy one. 
But would it do any good? If I were to labor a month, I could not 
express my conservative views and intentions more clearly and 
strongly, than they are expressed in our plat-form, and in my 
many speeches already in print, and before the public. And yet 
even you, who do occasionally speak of me in terms of personal 
kindness, give no prominence to these oft-repeated expressions of 
conservative views and intentions; but busy yourself with appeals 
to all conservative men, to vote for Douglas to vote any way 
which can possibly defeat me thus impressing your readers that 
you think, I am the very worst man living. If what I have already 

[134] 



OCTOBER 3 1, i860 

said has failed to convince you, no repetition of it would convince 
you. The writing of your letter, now before me, gives assurance 
that you would publish such a letter from me as you suggest; but, 
till now, what reason had I to suppose the Louisville Journal, even, 
would publish a repe\_ti~]tion of that which is already at it's com- 
mand, and which it does not press upon the public attention? 

And, now my friend for such I esteem you personally do 
not misunderstand me. I have not decided that I will not do sub- 
stantially what you suggest. I will not forbear 2 doing so, merely 
on punctilio and pluck. If I do finally abstain, it will be because 
of apprehension that it would do harm. For the good men of the 
South and I regard the majority of them as such I have no ob- 
jection to repeat seventy and seven times. But I have bad men also 
to deal with, both North and South men who are eager for some- 
thing new upon which to base new misrepresentations men who 
would like to frighten me, or, at least, to fix upon me the charac- 
ter of timidity and cowardice. They would seize upon almost any 
letter I could write, as being an "awful coming down" I intend 
keeping my eye upon these gentlemen, and to not unnecessarily 
put any weapons in their hands. Yours very truly A. LINCOLN 

[The following endorsement appears on the back: ] 

Confidential 

The within letter was written on the day of it's date, and, on re- 
flection, withheld till now. It expresses the views I still entertain. 

A. 



1 ALS copy, DLC-RTL. George D. Prentice, editor of the Louisville, Ken- 
tucky, Journal wrote October 26, that while he had no doubt of Lincoln's per- 
sonal and political integrity he was opposed to his election. Recognizing that 
Lincoln would be elected, however, he would suggest that Lincoln "... pre- 
pare a letter . . . setting forth your conservative views . . . and therefore 
calculated to assure all the good citizens of the South and to take from the 
disunionists every excuse or pretext for treason." (DLC-RTL). 

2 Lincoln deleted "abstain from** and substituted "forbear." 

To George G. Fogg 1 

George G. Fogg. Esq Springfield, Ills. Oct. 31. 1860 

My dear Sir: I sincerely thank yon for yours of the 26th. It is 

the first I have had from any of our knowing friends at the City, 

for several days. 

Allow me to beg that you will not live in much apprehension of 

my precipitating a letter upon the public. Yours very truly 

A. Liisrcousr 

[135] 



NOVEMBER 3, i860 

1 ALS, CSmH. Fogg's letter of October 26 enclosed a clipping from the New 
York Times which stated that upon election Lincoln would, or should, issue a 
statement concerning the institutions of the South. Fogg urged that Lincoln be 
silent until inaugurated (DLC-RTL). 

To John G. Nicolay 1 

November 3, [1860] 

I wish Mr. Nicolay would invite the following gentlemen to tea 
at ray house, at 5 P.M. to-morrow. 

Mr. Schenck Mr. Philips 

Mr. Piatt Mr. Hatch 

Mr. Cartter Mr. Dubois & 

Mr. Ogden Mr. Nicolay himself 

Saturday, Nov. 3. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, DLC-Nicolay Papers. Robert C. Schenck, Bonn Piatt, and David K. 
Cartter, of Ohio, were being mentioned as possible appointees to the cabinet 
in the event of Chase's declination, and Lincoln probably wished to have them 
meet the Illinois party leaders William B. Ogden, David L. Phillips, Ozias M. 
Hatch, and Jesse K. Dubois. A check mark preceding each name, except Og- 
den's, probably indicates Nicolay's performance of instructions 



To David Chambers 1 

Hon. David Chambers Springfield 111 Nov 5th 1860. 

Dear Sir Your kind letter of the 3st ult. came duly to hand. 
Please accept ray thanks for the favor. Yours Truly 

A. 



1 LS, DLC. David Chambers of Zanesville, Ohio, was U.S. representative 
1821-1823 and for several terms a member of the Ohio legislature. His letter of 
October 31 is not in the Lincoln Papers. 



To Hannibal Hamlin 1 

Confidential 
Hon. H. Hamlin. Springfield, Ills. Nov. 8, 1860 

My dear Sir. I am anxious for a personal interview with you 
at as early a day as possible. Can you, without much inconveni- 
ence, meet me at Chicago? If you can, please name as early a day 
as you conveniently can, and telegraph me; unless there be suffi- 
cient time, before the day named, to communicate by mail. Yours 
very truly A, LmcoLisr. 

1 ALS, IHi. Lincoln and Hamlin met at Chicago, November 21-26, to discuss 
the formation of Lincoln's cabinet. 

[136] 



To John Comstock 1 

John Comstock, Esq. Springfield, 111., 

My Dear Sir: Nov. 9, 1860. 

The barrel of flour, mentioned in your letter of the 2d, was duly 
received, and for which Mr. Peterfish, Messrs. Geo. Field & Co., 
and yourself, will please accept my sincere thanks. Yours very 
truly, A. 



1 Peoria Daily Transcript, November 14, 1860. John Comstock was a land 
agent and president of the Republican Club at Peoria who had sent Lincoln a 
barrel of flour "manufactured in the procession at the dedication of the Wig- 
wam in this city on the 3ist Aug. last .... Mr. W. Peterfish made and 
presents the barrel & Messrs, George Field & Co. the flour . . ." (DLC-R.TL). 
The Peoria Directory lists William Petefish as a cooper and doubtless this is 
the correct spelling of his name. 

To Nathan Sargent 1 

N. Sargent, Esq Springfield 111. Nov gth 1860. 

Dear Sir I have duly received your letter of the 4th inst. Will 
you please to write to me by return mail and give me the name of 
the Republican whom Judge Campbell suggested for Secretary of 
State? Yours Truly A. Lmcouxr 

1 LS, IHi Sargent's letter of November 4 is not in the Lincoln Papers, but 
his reply on November 12 states that Judge Campbell had suggested Thomas 
Ewing of Ohio. Writing from Washington, Sargent may have referred to Judge 
John A. Campbell of the United States Supreme Court, who was trying to as- 
suage hostile feelings in the South, but in view of Sargent's Philadelphia con- 
nections, he may have meant the prominent Democrat James Campbell, who 
had been judge of the Philadelphia Court of Common Pleas, 1842-1850 

To Winfield Scott 1 

Springfield, Ills. Nov. 9. 1860 
For Lieut. Gen. Scott, with the respects of A. LirsrcoijNr. 

Mr. Lincoln tenders his sincere thanks to Gen. Scott, for the 
copy of his "views &c," which is received; and especially for this 
renewed manifestation of his patriotic purposes as a citizen, con- 
nected, as it is, with his high official position, and most dis- 
tinguished character, as a military captain. A.L. 

iADfS, DLC-RTL. General Scott's memorandum "Views suggested by the 
imminent danger of a disruption of the Union by the secession of one or more 
Southern States," October 29, 1860, gave his opinion that secession would lead 
to four confederacies, that Lincoln should point out the unprofitable nature of 
slavery in the western territories, that seizure of Southern forts would precede 
secession, that a policy of moderation and firmness for the next twelve months 
would perhaps prevent secession, and that although he had no political interests 
he preferred the Bell-Everett ticket (DLC-B.TL). 

[137] 



Views on Commercial and Financial Uneasiness 1 

[c. November 9, 1860] 

I find Mr. Lincoln is not insensible to any uneasiness in the 
minds of candid men, nor to any commercial, or financial, de- 
pression, or disturbance, in the country if there be such; still he 
does not, so far as at present advised, deem it necessary, or proper 
for him to make, or authorize, any public declaration. He thinks 
candid men need only to examine his views already before the 
public. 

1 AD, DLC-RTL. This document is obviously contemporary with the let- 
ters to Truman Smith, November 10, and Nathaniel P. Paschall, November 16, 
infra. Possibly Lincoln jotted down the statement for Henry S. Sanford to copy 
and take back with him (see letter to Smith). It is also possible that Lincoln 
jotted it down for the correspondent of the New York Tribune, whose dispatch 
of November g reads in part as follows: "I believe it is correct to say that, al- 
though he is not at all unmindful of the uneasiness which may exist in many 
parts of the country, nor of the unfortunate commercial troubles that may have 
been threatened, he still does not discover any cause for specially developing 
his policy, or offering any public expression of his views." (New York Tribune 9 
November 10, 1860). 

To Truman Smith 1 

Private & confidential. 
Hon. Truman Smith Springfield 111 Nov loth 1860. 

My dear Sir This is intended as a strictly private letter to you, 
and not as an answer to yours brought me by Mr. Sanford. 2 It is 
with the most profound appreciation of your motive, and highest 
respect for your judgment too, that I feel constrained, for the pres- 
ent, at least, to make no declaration for the public. 

First, I could say nothing which I have not already said, and 
which is in print, and open for the inspection of all. To press a 
repetition of this upon those who have listened, is useless; to press 
it upon those who have refused to listen, and still refuse, would be 
wanting in self-respect, and would have an appearance of syco- 
phancy and timidity, which would excite the contempt of good 
men, and encourage bad ones to clamor the more loudly. 

I am not insensible to any commercial or financial depression 
that may exist; but nothing is to be gained by fawning around the 
"respectable scoundrels" who got it up. Let them go to work and 
repair the mischief of their own making; and then perhaps they 
will be less greedy to do the like again. Yours very truly 

A. LiisrcoLrc. 

1 Copy, DLC-RTL. Ex-representative (1839-1843, 1845-1849) and Senator 
(1849-1854) Truman Smith of Stamford, Connecticut, wrote on November 7, 
urging Lincoln to make a public statement *'. . . to disarm mischief makers, to 

[138] 



NOVEMBER 16, i860 

allay causeless anxiety, to compose the public mind and to induce all good 
citizens to ... 'judge the tree by it's fruit'. . . ." (DLC-RTL). See also Lin- 
coln to George T. M. Davis, October 27, supra. 

2 Henry S. Sanford of Derby, Connecticut, charge d'affaires at Paris during 
President Taylor's administration, had carried a letter of introduction dated 
October 30, 1860 (DLC-RTL), but there is no other letter from Smith prior to 
that of November 7. Probably Sanford's mission was concerned with the same 
subject as Smith's letter of November 7. 

To [Albert?] Hale 1 

Springfield, Nov. 12. 1860 

Mr. Hale will oblige me, if he will send by the bearer, the Chi- 
cago Tribune we were looking at this morning. Yours truly 

A. 



1 ALS, owned by the Chicago Tribune, Chicago, Illinois. Although "Mr. Hale" 
cannot be positively identified, the probability is that Reverend Albert Hale, 
pastor of Springfield's Second Presbyterian Church, was the possessor of the 
newspaper sought by Lincoln. 

To Samuel Haycraft 1 

Private^ and confidential 
Hon. Samuel Haycraft Springfield, Ills. Nov. 13. 1860 

My dear Sir. Yours of the gth. is just received. I can only an- 
swer briefly. Rest fully assured that the good people of the South 
who will put themselves in the same temper and mood towards me 
which you do, will find no cause to complain of me. 

While I can not, as yet, make any committal as to offices, I sin- 
cerely hope I may find it in my power to oblige the friends of Mr. 
Winter smith. [Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.] 

1 ALS, CSmH. The close and signature have been cut from the manuscript. 
Haycraft's letter of November 9 expressed hope for Lincoln's administration and 
the belief that ". . . our Southern fire eaters will find . . . you a con- 
servative cheif of the nation in a national point of view. . . ." and noted that 
the people of Elizabethtown, Kentucky, hoped Robert L. Wintersmith, a Lincoln 
elector, would be "remembered while favours are being dispensed." (DLC- 
RTL). 

To Nathaniel E PaschalF 

Private (& confidential. 
N. P. Paschall Esq Springfield Nov i6th. 1860. 

My dear Sir Mr. Ridgely 2 showed me a letter of yours in which 
you manifest some anxiety that I should make some public declara- 
tion with a view to favorably affect the business of the country. I 
said to Mr. Ridgely I would write you to-day, which I now do. 

I could say nothing which I have not already said, and which is 

[139] 



ISTOVEMBER 9, i860 

in print and accessible to the public. Please pardon me for suggest- 
ing that if the papers, like yours, which heretofore have persist- 
ently garbled, and misrepresented what I have said, will now fully 
and fairly place it before their readers, there can be no further mis- 
understanding. I beg you to believe me sincere when I declare I do 
not say this in a spirit of complaint or resentment; but that I urge 
it as the true cure for any real uneasiness in the country that my 
course may be other than conservative. The Republican news- 
papers now, and for some time past, are and have been republish- 
ing copious extracts from my many published speeches, which 
would at once reach the whole public if your class of papers would 
also publish them. 

I am not at liberty to shift my ground that is out of the ques- 
tion. If I thought a repetition would do any good I would make it. 
But my judgment is it would do positive harm. The secessionists, 
per se believing they had alarmed me, would clamor all the louder. 

Yours &C A. Ll3NTCOL3NT. 

1 Copy, DLC-RTL.. Paschall, editor of the Missouri Republican., replied, No- 
vember 18, that his paper had advocated that Lincoln, being elected, be given 
a fair trial, but he added that if Missouri was to be kept in the Union a state- 
ment from Lincoln would be needed. Lincoln's previous speeches had little 
effect in the South because they came from papers such as the New York 
Tribune and Times and the Chicago Tribune and Democrat, all enemies of the 
South. Paschall suggested that Lincoln authorize Herndon or some other friend 
to condense all his speeches of the past three years for publication (DLC-RTL). 

2 Probably Nicholas H. Ridgely or Charles Ridgely, Springfield bankers. 

To Henry Asbury 1 

Henry Asbury Esq Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Nov. 19. 1860 

Yours of the gth. was received in due course; but, till now, I 
have not found time to acknowledge the receipt of it. 

It is a little curious, and not wholy uninteresting, to look over 
those old letters of yours and mine. I would like to indulge in some 
comments, but really I have not the time. Yours very truly 

A. Lirrcousr 

1 ALS, RPB. Asbury's letter of November 9 is not in the Lincoln Papers. 

To Park Benjamin 1 

Park Benjamin, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir. Nov. 19. 1860 

Your kind note of congratulation was received in due course; and 
you are not disappointed in the hope you express that I may set 
some value upon it. 

[140] 



1STOVKMBER 2O, i860 

That my political position., and personal history, are such as to 
meet the unselfish approval of one possessing your high literary 
fame and character, is matter of sincere pride with me. Yours very 
truly A. 



l ALS, owned by Henry R Benjamin, New York City. New York journalist 
and man of letters, Park Benjamin -wrote on November 7 that he hoped Lincoln 
would set some value on the congratulations ". . . of a literary man and not 
a party -politician; but your firm, fast and constant friend during the con- 
test. . . ." (DLC-RTL). 

To Joshua F. Speed 1 

Dear Speed Springfield. Ills. Nov. 19. 1860 

Yours of the 14th. is received. I shall be at Chicago Thursday 
the 22nd. Inst. and one or two succeeding days. Could you not meet 
me there? 

Mary thinks of going with me; and therefore I suggest that Mrs. 
S. accompany you. 

Please let this be private, as I prefer a very great crowd should 
not gather at Chicago. 

Respects to Mrs. S. Your friend, as ever A. LIINTCOLINT 

1 ALS, ORB. Speed's letter written at Louisville, Kentucky, November 14, 
sent congratulations and offered ". . . . if it would be agreeable to you I will 
come <& see you and I think I can impart to you some information as to men 
and public sentiment here which may be valuable." (DLC-RTL). Speed met 
Lincoln at Chicago, more or less secretly at Speed's hotel, and according to 
Speed's later testimony, Lincoln led up to an offer of a place in the cabinet, 
which Speed forestalled by declaring that he wanted no appointment. Lincoln 
then asked Speed to sound out James Guthne of Louisville, secretary of the 
treasury under Franklin Pierce, as a possible secretary of war (Herndon, III, 
477). 

Passage Written for Lyman Trumbull's Speech 
at Springfield, Illinois 1 

November 20, 1860 

I have labored in, and for, the Republican organization with en- 
tire confidence that whenever it shall be in power, each and all of 
the States will be left in as complete control of their own affairs 
respectively, and at as perfect liberty to choose, and employ, their 
own means of protecting property, and preserving peace and order 
within their respective limits, as they have ever been under any 
administration. Those who have voted for Mr. Lincoln, have ex- 
pected, and still expect this; and they would not have voted for him 
had they expected otherwise. I regard it as extremely fortunate for 
the peace of the whole country, that this point, upon which the Re- 

[141] 



NOVEMBER 2 (X, i860 

publicans have been so long, and so persistently misrepresented, is 
now to be brought to a practical test, and placed beyond the possi- 
bility of doubt. 2 Disunionists per se* are now in hot haste to get 
out of the Union, precisely because they perceive they can not, 
much longer, maintain apprehension among the Southern people 
that their homes, and firesides, and lives, are to be endangered by 
the action of the Federal Government. With such "Noiv, or never" 
is the maxim. 4 

I am rather glad of this military preparation in the South. It 
will enable the people the more easily to suppress any uprisings 
there, which their misrepresentations of purposes may have en- 
couraged. 

1 AD, IHi. Trumbull's note, written in pencil at the top of the page, is as 
follows: "Furnished by Mr. Lincoln & copied into my remarks ... at Spring- 
field, 111. Nov. 20 1860." Although Lincoln felt constrained not to express 
publicly in his own person the assurance which so many of his correspondents 
were demanding, he undertook by means of Trumbull's speech to try the effect 
of a quasi-official statement of his views. That his anticipation of failure for the 
effort did not lessen his disappointment is indicated in his letter to Henry J. 
Raymond, November 28, infra. As will be seen in the succeeding footnotes, 
Trumbull went even beyond Lincoln's assurance, and yet the secessionists ig- 
nored the statement. 

2 In Trumbull's speech as reported in the Illinois State Journal, November 
21, 1860, the following passage is inserted at this point: "It should be a matter 
of rejoicing to all true Republicans, that they will now have an opportunity 
of demonstrating to their political adversaries and to the world, that they are 
not for interfering with the domestic institutions of any of the States, nor the 
advocates of negro-equality or amalgamation, with which political demagogues 
have so often charged them. When this is shown, a re-action will assuredly 
take place in favor of Republicanism, the Southern mind even will be satisfied, 
the rights of Northern men will be respected, and the fraternal feeling existing 
in olden times, when men from all parts of the country went forth together 
to battle for a common cause, against a common enemy, will be restored." 

s Trumbull's speech inserted as follows: "of whom, unfortunately, there have 
been a few in the country for some years, . . . .* 
4 The next paragraph was not used by Trumbull. 



Remarks at Springfield-, Illinois 1 

November 20, 1860 

FRIENDS A:NTD FELLOW- CITIZENS: Please excuse me, on this oc- 
casion, from making a speech. I thank you for the kindness and 
compliment of this call. I thank you, in common with all others, 
who have thought fit, by their votes, to indorse the Republican 
cause. I rejoice with you in the success which has, so far, attended 
that cause. Yet in all our rejoicing let us neither express, nor 
cherish, any harsh feeling towards any citizen who, by his vote, 
has differed with us. Let us at all times remember that all Amer- 

[142] 



ISTOVEMBER 21, i860 

lean citizens are brothers of a common country, and should dwell 
together in the bonds of fraternal feeling. 

Let me again beg you to accept my thanks, and to excuse me 
from further speaking at this time. 

1 Illinois State Journal, November 21, 1860. Lincoln made his remarks when 
called out by a parade of Wide-A wakes which passed the Lincoln home on the 
way to the Wigwam where Senator Tn rm bull and others were to address a 
Republican victory celebration. 



Remarks at Lincoln., Illinois 1 

November 21, 860 

FELLOW CITIZENS: I thank you for this mark of your kindness 
toward me. I have been shut up in Springfield for the last few- 
months, and therefore have been unable to greet you, as I was for- 
merly in the habit of doing. I am passing on my way to Chicago, 
and am happy in doing so to be able to meet so many of my friends 
in Logan County, and if to do no more, to exchange 2 with you the 
compliments of the season, and to thank you for the many kind- 
nesses you have manifested toward me. I am not in the habit of 
making speeches now, and I would therefore ask to be excused 
from entering upon any discussion of the political topics of the day. 
I am glad to see so many happy faces, and to listen to so many 
pleasant expressions. Again thanking you for this honor, I will pass 
on my journey. 

1 New York Tribune, November 23, 1860. Lincoln's party, including Mrs. 
Lincoln, Senator and Mrs. Trumbull, and Mr. and Mrs. Dorm Piatt of Onio, left 
Springfield on the morning train for Chicago. Three short speeches were made 
en route, at Lincoln, Bloomington, and Lexington. 

2 The New York Herald, November 22, reported this phrase as follows: ". . . 
even if to do no more than exchange with you. . . ." 



Remarks at Bloomington-, Illinois 1 

November 21, 1860 

FELLOW-CITIZENS OF BLoojvmsrGTOisr AND McLEAN COUNTY: I 
am glad to meet you after a longer separation than has been com- 
mon between you and me. I thank you for the good report you 
made of the election in Old McLean. The people of the country- 
have again fixed up their affairs for a constitutional period of time. 
By the way, I think very much of the people, as an old friend said 
he thought of woman. He said when he lost his first wife, who had 
been a great help to him in his business, he thought he -was ruined 

[143] 



NOVEMBER 21, i860 

that he could never find another to fill her place. At length, how- 
ever, he married another, who he found did quite as well as the 
first, and that his opinion now was that any woman would do well 
who was well done by. So I think of the whole people of this na- 
tion they will ever do well if well done by. We will try to do well 
by them in all parts of the country, North and South, with entire 
confidence that all will be well with all of us. 

1 New York Tribune., November 23, 1860 The Illinois State Journal, Novem- 
ber 23, and the New York Herald., November 22, have identical wording. 



Remarks at Lexington, Illinois 1 

November 21,1 860 

.... "Old Abe" came out, showed himself and made a little 
speech, thanking his fellow citizens for the honor of their presence, 
and reminding them that soon after the Sixth of November he 
heard good news from this portion of McLean County. 

1 Lexington Weekly Globe., November 22, 1860. The Globe further com- 
mented, "Old Abe looks as though the campaign had worn lightly upon him. 
He is commencing to raise a beautiful pair of whiskers, and looks younger than 
usual. Still there is no disguising the fact that he is homely. . . ." 



Endorsement: Thomas B. Bryan to Lincoln 1 

[November 22, 1860] 

I now fear I can not find leisure to avail myself of this Mr. 
Bryan's kindness. A. 



1 AES, ICHi. On November 22, 1860, Thomas B. Bryan, proprietor of Bryan 
Hall, Chicago, invited President-elect and Mrs. Lincoln to visit his establish- 
ment to view the "Gallery of the Presidential Portraits from Washington to 
Lincoln inclusive. . . ." Lincoln's reply is written in pencil on the back of 
Bryan's invitation. 



Endorsement: Caspar Butz to Lincoln 1 

[November 23, 1860] 

We expect to leave for home on the morning of the 24th. I there- 
fore regret to say I can not see Mr. Schurz here to-morrow. 

A LlINTCOLN 

1 AES, DLC-RTL. Caspar Butz's letter dated November 23, 1860, requests an 
interview for Carl Schurz who will come to Chicago on the 24th on his way 
East "in passing through this city. . . ." Butz was a prominent Chicago Re- 
publican, former representative in the state legislature from Cook County. 

[144] 



To Henry C. Whitney 1 

H. C. Whitney, Esq Chicago, 

My dear Sir. Nov. 26. 1860 

Your note in behalf of Mr. Alshuler was received. I gave him 
a sitting. 

I regret not having an oppertunity to see more of you. 

Please present my respects to Mrs. W. & to your good Father & 
Mother Yours very truly A LusrcoLisr 

1 ALS, IHI. The letter is written on stationery of the Tremont House. Whit- 
ney had requested Lincoln to allow his friend Samuel G. Alschuler, a photog- 
rapher formerly at Urbana, Illinois, to take a photograph. The resulting photo- 
graph is unique in showing Lincoln with half -whiskers. 

To Hannibal Hamlin 1 

Springfield, Illinois, November 27, 1860. 

My dear Sir: On reaching home I find I have in charge for you 
the inclosed letter. 

I deem it proper to advise you that I also find letters here from 
very strong and unexpected quarters in Pennsylvania, urging the 
appointment of General Cameron to a place in the cabinet. 

Let this be a profound secret, even though I do think best to let 
you know it. Yours very sincerely, A. Liisrcousr. 

1 NH, VI, 72-73. Lincoln and Hamlin had discussed cabinet appointments at 
Chicago. There is nothing in Hamlin's letter of December 4, to indicate the 
nature of Lincoln's enclosure. See Lincoln to Hamlin, December 8, infra. 

To Fred R. Jackson 1 

Fred R. Jackson, Esq Springfield, Ills. Nov. 27. 1860 

My dear Sir Your kind letter of congratulation is received, and 
for which, please accept my thanks. Below is my autograph, ac- 
cording to your request. Yours truly A. LiisrcoLisr. 

1 ALS, RPB. Jackson's letter is not in the Lincoln Papers. He was a resident 
of Stillwater, New York. 

To Henry J. Raymond 1 

Private & confidential 

Hon. H, J. Raymond Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Nov. 28. 1860 

Yours of the 14th. was received in due course. I have delayed so 
long to answer it, because my reasons for not coming before the 

[145] 



[NOVEMBER 3O 9 i860 

public in any form just now, had substantially appeared in your 
paper (The Times), and hence I feared they were not deemed suf- 
ficient by you, else you would not have written me as you did. 

I now think we have a demonstration in favor of my view. On 
the 20th. Inst. Senator Trumbull made a short speech which I sup- 
pose you have both seen and approved. 2 Has a single newspaper, 
heretofore against us, urged that speech [upon its readers] with a 
purpose to quiet public anxiety? Not one, so far as I know. On the 
contrary the Boston Courier, and its' class, hold me responsible for 
the speech, and endeavor to inflame the North with the belief that 
it foreshadows an abandonment of Republican ground by the in- 
coming administration; while the "Washington Constitution, and 
its' class hold the same speech up to the South as an open declara- 
tion of war against them. 

This is just as I expected, and just what would happen with any 
declaration I could make. These political fiends are not half sick 
enough yet. "Party malice" and not "public good" possesses them 
entirely. "They seek a sign, and no sign shall be given them." At 
least such is my present feeling and purpose. [Yours very truly 

A. 



1 ALS, IHi. An accompanying note by Raymond explains that he had cut 
off the signature to oblige a friend with Lincoln's autograph. 

2 See Lincoln's statement incorporated in TrumbuH's speech, November 20, 
supra. 

Note for John H. Littlefield 1 

Springfield, Nov 30. 1860 

I will pay five dollars to whomever will loan that sum to the 
bearer, Mr. Littlefield. A. 



1 ADS, CSmH. John H. Littlefield was a law student in the Lincoln & 
Herndon office. 

To Alexander H. Stephens 1 

Hon, A. H. Stephens Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir. Nov. 30, 1860 

I have read, in the newspapers, your speech recently delivered 
(I think) "before the Georgia Legislature, or it's assembled mem- 
bers. If you have revised it, as is probable, I shall be much obliged 
if you will send me a copy. Yours very truly A. LmcoLisr. 

1ALS, CSmH. Stephens replied, December 14, that he had not revised the 
speech but that the newspaper reports were substantially correct (ibid.). 

[146] 



Certified Transcript of Passage from 
the House Divided Speech 1 

December 7, 1860 

"We are now far into the fifth year since a policy -was initiated, 
with the avowed object, and confident promise, of putting an end 
to slavery agitation. Under the operation of that policy, that agi- 
tation has not only not ceased, but has continually augmented. 
I believe it will not cease till a crisis shall have been reached and 
passed. A house divided against itself cannot stand. I believe this 
government cannot endure permanently half slave and half free. 
I do not expect the Union to be dissolved. I do not expect the house 
to fall; but I do expect it will cease to be divided. It will become 
all one thing or all the other. Either the opponents of slavery will 
arrest the further spread of it, and place it where the public mind 
shall rest in the belief that it is in course of ultimate extinction; 
or its advocates will push it forward till it will become alike lawful 
in all the States old as well as new North as well as South." 

The foregoing, in pencil, in my own hand, is a copy of an extract 
of a speech of mine delivered June 16. 1858, which I now state at 
the request of Mr. E. B. Pease. 2 A. Lirsrcousr 

Dec. 7. 1860. 

1 The Rosenbach Company, The History of America in Documents (1951), 
III, 15. According to the catalog description this is an autograph document 
signed. 2 Edward B. Pease was a hardware dealer at Springfield. 



To Hannibal Hamlin 1 

(Private.) 

Springfield, Illinois,, December 8, 1860. 

My dear Sir: Yours of the 4th was duly received. The inclosed 
to Governor Seward covers two notes to him, copies of which you 
find open for your inspection. 2 Consult with Judge Trumbull; and 
if you and he see no reason to the contrary, deliver the letter to 
Governor Seward at once. If you see reason to the contrary, write 
me at once. 

I have had an intimation that Governor Banks would yet accept 
a place in the cabinet. Please ascertain and write me how this is. 
Yours very truly. A, LmcoLisr. 

1 NH, VI, 75-76. Hamlin's letter of December 4 concerns his going to Seward 
to learn his wishes about a cabinet post (DLC-RTL). Hamlin replied Decem- 
ber 14 that he had consulted with Trombull and then delivered the letters to 

[147] 



DECBMBER 8, i860 

Seward. He answered Lincoln's question regarding Nathaniel P. Banks by say- 
ing that Gideon Welles or John A Andrew, governor-elect of Massachusetts, 
would be a better appointment: "Mr. B. is a man of decided ability, but he is 
wonderfully cold and selfish. I do not hear him talked of by our N. E. friends." 
(DLC-RTL). 2 Vide infra. 



To William EL Seward 1 

Springfield, Ills. Dec. 8 1860 

My dear Sir: With, your permission, I shall, at the proper time, 
nominate you to the Senate, for confirmation, as Secretary of State, 
for the United States. 

Please let me hear from you at your own earliest convenience 
Your friend and obedient servant A. 

Hon. William H. Seward, 
Washington D.C. 



NAuE; ALS copy, MeHi. Hamlin wrote on the bottom of the copy 
"The above letter with another in the same words, which I was to deliver to 
Mr Seward were reed by me from Mr Lincoln The one to Mr Seward was 
duly delivered, and that was the first information he had that the position of 
Secy of State would be offered to him The letters were both in the hand writ- 
ing of Mr Lincoln H. HAMLIIST." 



To William H. Seward 1 

Private & Confidential 

Springfield Ills. Dec. 8. 1860 

My dear Sir: In addition to the accompanying, and more formal 
note, inviting you to take charge of the State Department, I deem 
it proper to address you this. Rumors have got into the newspapers 
to the effect that the Department, named above, would be tendered 
you, as a compliment, and with the expectation that you would 
decline it. I beg you to be assured that I have said nothing to justify 
these rumors. On the contrary, it has been my purpose, from the 
day of the nomination at Chicago, to assign you, by your leave, 
this place in the administration. I have delayed so long to com- 
municate that purpose, in deference to what appeared to me to be 
a proper caution in the case. Nothing has been developed to change 
my view in the premises; and I now offer you the place, in the 
hope that you will accept it, and with the belief that your position 
in the public eye, your integrity, ability, learning, and great ex- 
perience, all combine to render it an appointment pre-eminently 
fit to be made. 

[148] 



DECEMBER 1O, i860 

One word more. In regard to the patronage, sought with so much 
eagerness and jealousy, I have prescribed for myself the maxim, 
"Justice to all"; and I earnestly beseech your co-operation in keep- 
ing the maxim good. Your friend, and obedient servant 

Hon. William H. Seward A. LINCOLN 

Washington D.C. 

1 ALS, NAuE. Seward replied to Lincoln's longer and more informal let- 
ter on December 13, asking "... a little time to consider whether I possess 
the qualifications and temper of a minister and whether it is in such a capacity 
that my friends would prefer that I should act if I am to continue at all in the 
public service. . . . Whatever may be my conclusion you may rest assured of 
my hearty concurrence in your views in regard to the distribution of the public 
offices as you have communicated them. . . ." (DLG-RTL). On December 28 
Seward sent a brief, formal letter of acceptance. 

To Lyman Trumbull 1 

Private 
Hon. Lyman Trumbull Springfield, Ills. Dec. 8. 1860. 

My dear Sir: Yours of the 2nd. is received. I regret exceedingly 
the anxiety of our friends in New- York, of whom you write; but 
it seems to me the sentiment in that state which sent a united dele- 
gation to Chicago in favor of Gov. S. ought not, and must not be 
snubbed, as it would be by the omission to offer Gov. S. a place in 
the cabinet. I will, myself, take care of the question of "corrupt 
jobs" and see that justice is done to all, our friends, of whom you 
write, as well as others. I have written Mr. Hamlin, on this very 
subject of Gov. S. and requested him to consult fully with you. He 
will show you my note, and inclosures to him; and then please act 
as therein requested. Yours as ever A. LiisrcoLisr 

1 ALS, ICHi. Trumbull wrote on December 2 that a committee headed by 
William C. Bryant had called on him with reports of corruption in the New 
York legislature which might lose the next state elections if not repudiated, and 
that since Seward's friends were implicated the committee "... did not think it 
advisable for Gov. S. to go into the cabinet, lest his going should bring with it 
a set of dishonest men." (DLC-RTL) . 

To Lyman Trrnnbull 1 

Private, & confidential 
Hon. L. Trumbull. Springfield, Ills. Dec. 10. 1860 

My dear Sir: Let there be no compromise on the question of 
extending slavery. If there be, all our labor is lost, and, ere long, 
must be done again. The dangerous ground that into which some 
of our friends have a hankering to run is Pop. Sov. Have none 

[149] 



DECEMBER 11, i860 

of it. Stand firm. The tug has to come, & better now, than any 
time hereafter. Yours as ever A. LINCOLN. 

3-ALS, CSmH. TrumbulFs letter of December 4 voiced surprise "that the 
House voted to raise a committee on the State of the Union. It seems to me 
that for Republicans to take steps towards getting up committees on proposing 
new compromises . . . would be wrong. . . ." (DLC-R.TL). See Lincoln to 
Kellogg, December 11, infra. 



To William Kellogg 1 

Private & confidential. 

Hon. William Kellogg. Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Dec. 11. 1860 

Entertain no proposition for a compromise in regard to the ex- 
tension of slavery. The instant you do, they have us under again; 
all our labor is lost, and sooner or later must be done over. Douglas 
is sure to be again trying to bring in his "Pop. Sov." Have none of 
it. The tug has to come & better now than later. 

You know I think the fugitive slave clause of the constitution 
ought to be enforced to put it on the mildest form, ought not to 
be resisted. In haste Yours as ever A. 



1 ALS, ORB. Kellogg wrote on December 6, advising Lincoln of the action of 
the House in raising a committee, of which he was a member, ". . . to consider 
that part of the President's Message in relation to the secession of the Cotton 
States. . . ." and asking Lincoln's suggestions "... in relation to the remedy 
for the present difficulties. . . ." (DLC-RTL) . 



Editorial in the Illinois State Journal 

December 12, 1860 

We see such frequent allusion to a supposed purpose on the part 
of Mr. Lincoln to call into his cabinet two or three Southern gen- 
tlemen, from the parties opposed to him politically, that we are 
prompted to ask a f ew questions. 

ist. Is it known that any such gentleman of character, would ac- 
cept a place in the cabinet? 

2 If yea, on what terms? Does he surrender to Mr. Lincoln, or 
Mr. Lincoln to him, on the political difference between them? Or 
do they enter upon the administration in open opposition to each 
other? 

What is the understanding on these questions? 

1 AD, DLC-RTL. The editorial appeared in the Journal on December 12, 
1860. 

[150] 



To Elihu B. Washburne 1 

Private & confidential 
Hon. E. B. Washburne Springfield, Ills. Dec. 13. 1860 

My dear Sir. Your long letter received. Prevent, as far as pos- 
sible., any of our friends from demoralizing themselves, and our 
cause, by entertaining propositions for compromise of any sort, on 
"slavery extention" There is no possible compromise upon it, but 
which puts us under again, and leaves all our work to do over 
again. Whether it be a Mo. line, or Eli Thayer's Pop. Sov. it is all 
the same. Let either be done, & immediately filibustering and ex- 
tending slavery recommences. On that point hold firm, as with a 
chain of steeL Yours as ever A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, owned by Clarke Washburne, Winnetka, Illinois. Washburne wrote on 
December 9 of the imminent peril of secession, his fear that President Bu- 
chanan would let Charleston forts go by not sending a defending force, and his 
belief that Republicans should stay out of the debate in Congress and that in 
particular the Committee of Thirty-three would do little good, but would re- 
sult "... in distracting our friends. . . ." (DLC-RTL) . 



Endorsement: Richard M. Corwine to Lincoln 1 

[c. December 14, 1860] 
See if there is anything in this. 

1 AE, DLC-Nicolay Papers. Lincoln's endorsement is on the envelope of Cor- 
wine's long letter of December 14, 1860, expressing the opinion that the South 
will quiet down if handled firmly. 



To John A. Gilmer 1 

Strictly confidential. 
Hon. John A. Gilmer: Springfield, 111. Dec 15, 1860. 

My dear Sir Yours of the loth is received. I am greatly disin- 
clined to write a letter on the subject embraced in yours; and I 
would not do so, even privately as I do, were it not that I fear you 
might misconstrue my silence. Is it desired that I shall shift the 
ground upon which I have been elected? I can not do it. You need 
only to acquaint yourself with that ground, and press it on the at- 
tention of the South. It is all in print and easy of access. May I be 
pardoned if I ask whether even you have ever attempted to pro- 
cure the reading of the Republican platform, or my speeches, by 
the Southern people? If not, what reason have I to expect that any 
additional production of mine would meet a better fate? It would 

[151] 



DECEMBER 5, i860 

mate me appear as if I repented for the crime of having been 
elected, and was anxious to apologize and beg forgiveness. To so 
represent me, would be the principal use made of any letter I 
might now thrust upon the public. My old record cannot be so 
used; and that is precisely the reason that some new declaration is 
so much sought. 

Now, my dear sir, be assured, that I am not questioning your 
candor; I am only pointing out, that, while a new letter would 
hurt the cause which I think a just one, you can quite as well effect 
every patriotic object with the old record. Carefully read pages 18, 
19, 74, 75, 88, 89, & 267 of the volume of Joint Debates between 
Senator Douglas and myself, with the Republican Platform adopted 
at Chicago, and all your questions will be substantially answered. 
I have no thought of recommending the abolition of slavery in the 
District of Columbia, nor the slave trade among the slave states, 
even on the conditions indicated; and if I were to make such rec- 
ommendation, it is quite clear Congress would not follow it. 

As to employing slaves in Arsenals and Dockyards, it is a thing I 
never thought of in my life, to my recollection, till I saw your let- 
ter; and I may say of it, precisely as I have said of the two points 
above. 

As to the use of patronage in the slave states, where there are 
few or no Republicans, I do not expect to inquire for the politics of 
the appointee, or whether he does or not own slaves. I intend in 
that matter to accommodate the people in the several localities, if 
they themselves will allow me to accommodate them. In one word, 
I never have been, am not now, and probably never shall be, in a 
mood of harassing the people, either North or South. 

On the territorial question, 2 I am inflexible, as you see my posi- 
tion in the book. On that, there is a difference between you and us; 
and it is the only substantial difference. You think slavery is right 
and ought to be extended; we think it is wrong and ought to be 
restricted. For this, neither has any just occasion to be angry with 
the other. 

As to the state laws, mentioned in your sixth question, I really 
know very little of them. I never have read one. If any of them are 
in conflict with the fugitive slave clause, or any other part of the 
constitution, I certainly should be glad of their repeal; but I could 
hardly be justified, as a citizen of Illinois, or as President of the 
United States, to recommend the repeal of a statute of Vermont, or 
South Carolina. 

With the assurance of my highest regards I subscribe my- 
self Your obt. Servt., A. LUNTCOUST 

[152] 



DECEMBER 1 7, 1 8 6 O 

ES. The documents referred to, I suppose you will readily find 
in Washington. A. L. 

1 Copy, DLC-RTL. Gilmer's letter of December 10, enclosed with Corwin's 
letter of December 11 (DLC-RTL), asked Lincoln to make a public statement 
answering specific questions, the nature of which is indicated by Lincoln's re- 
plies. Although Lincoln marked his letter "strictly confidential," an article ap- 
peared shortly afterward in the Missouri Democrat (copied by Cincinnati Daily 
Commercial, January 10, 1861), which recounted an interview in the parlor of 
Lincoln's home while he was in the midst of writing "to some Southern gentle- 
men " In the interview the identical points are made in almost identical lan- 
guage. Probably Francis P. Blair, Jr., wrote the article. See Lincoln to Blair, 
December 18, infra. Lincoln to Trumbull and to Weed, December 17, infra, 
indicate that the letter to Gilmer was enclosed to Thomas Corwin for delivery 
to Gilmer. A second letter to Gilmer broaching the question of his accepting a 
place in the cabinet, written on or after December 21, is presumably not extant. 
Gilmer to Lincoln, December 29, refers to receipt of a telegram dated Decem- 
ber 21, and a letter received December 26, requesting Gilmer to come to Spring- 
field Gilmer replied that such a visit ". . . would not be useful. . . ." (DLC- 
RTL). 

2 Gilmer's question read ". . . whether, on the application of any new State 
for admission into the Union, you would veto an act of Congress admitting the 
same because slavery was tolerated in her constitution . . . also indicate the 
policy ... to settle . . . the disturbmg question of slavery in the Territories." 
(DLC-RTL). 



To Lyman Trumbull 1 

Confidential 
Hon. Lyman Trumbull Springfield, Ills. Dec. 17. 1860 

My dear Sir: Yours inclosing Mr. Wade's letter, which I here- 
with return, is received. 

If any of our friends do prove false, and fix up a compromise on 
the territorial question, I am for fighting again that is all. (It is 
but repetition for me to say I am for an honest inf orcement of the 
constitution fugitive slave clause included.) Mr. Gilmer of N.C. 
wrote me; and I answered confidentially, inclosing my letter to 
Gov. Corwin, 2 to be delivered or not, as he might deem prudent. I 
now inclose you a copy of it. 

[The signature has been cut off.] 

1 ALS, CSmH. Trumbull wrote on December 14, enclosing an "old letter" 
from Benjamin F. Wade, ". . . but you -will see from it, what his views are." 
He added that he understood some people "high up" in the South were to write 
Lincoln for a statement and that if they were sufficiently prominent Lincoln's 
answer might do good (DLC-RTL). 

2 No letter of this period to Thomas Corwin seems to "be extant, but Lincoln 
here implies that his letter to John A. Gilmer (December 15, supra) was sent 
to Corwin, and Corwin's letter of December 11 enclosing Gilmer's letter of De- 
cember 10 requested that Lincoln's reply be enclosed in care of Corwin. 

[153] 



To Thurlow Weed 1 

Private & confidential. 
Hon. Thurlow Weed Springfield, Ills- Dec. 17- 1860 

My dear Sir Yours of the nth. was received two days ago. 
Should the convocation of Governors, of which you speak, seem de- 
sirous to know my view's on the present aspect of things, tell them 
you judge from my speeches that I will be inflexible on the terri- 
torial question; that I probably think either the Missouri line ex- 
tended, or Douglas' and Eli Thayer's Pop. Sov. would lose us every- 
thing -we gained by the election; that filibustering for all South of 
us, and making slave states of it, would follow in spite of us, under 
either plan. 

Also, that I probably think all opposition, real and apparant, to 
the fugitive slave [clause] of the constitution ought to be with- 
drawn. 

I believe you can pretend to find but little, if any thing, in my 
speeches, about secession; but my opinion is that no state can, in 
any way lawfully, get out of the Union, without the consent of the 
others; and that it is the duty of the President, and other govern- 
ment functionaries to run the machine as it is. Yours very truly 

A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, NRU-Thurlow Weed Papers on deposit. Weed wrote on December 1 1 
that he and others had thought it a good plan to invite the governors to meet at 
New York City on Thursday, December 20, so that ". . if possible, there 
should be harmony of views and action between them." (DLC-RTL). 

To Edward Bates 1 

Confidential. 

Springfield, 111 Dec i8th 1860. 

My dear sir: Yours of to-day is just received. Let a little editorial 
appear in the Missouri Democrat, in about these words: 

"We have the permission of both Mr. Lincoln and Mr. Bates to 
say that the latter will be offered, and will accept, a place in the 
new Cabinet, subject of course to the action of the Senate. It is not 
yet definitely settled which Department will be assigned to Mr. 
Bates." 

Let it go just as above, or with any modification which may 
seem proper to you. Yours very truly A. LINCOLN 

Hon. Edward Bates 

1 Copy, DLC-RTL. Bates wrote on December 18 that upon returning to St. 
Louis from his conference with Lincoln he and judicious friends had concluded 

[154] 



DECEMBER 1 8, 1 8 6 O 

that "a good effect might be produced on the public mind especially in the 
border Slave States by letting the people know (substantially) the relations 
which now subsist between us. . . ." (DLC-RTL). 



To Montgomery Blair 1 

Hon. M. Blair Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Dec. 18. 1860 

Yours of the 14th. is just received. I have just sent a confidential 
letter to Hon. Mr. Gilmer 2 of N.C. a copy of which I have inclosed 
to Senator Trumbull. In order that you may see why I think a 
public letter from me would do harm, and how all proper objects 
which could be effected by it, can be as well effected without, I au- 
thorize Judge Trumbull to show you the copy, confidentially, of 
course. Yours truly A. 

1 ALS, DLC-Blair Papers. 

2 See letter to John A. Gilmer, December 15, supra. 



To John D. Defrees 1 

Confidential 

Hon. Jno. D, Defrees. Springfield His. 

My dear Sir Dec. 18. 1860 

Yours of the 15th, is received. I am sorry any republican inclines 
to dally with Pop. Sov. of any sort. It acknowledges that slavery 
has equal rights with liberty, and surrenders all we have contended 
for. Once fastened on us as a settled policy, filibustering for all 
South of us, and making slave states of it, follows in spite of us, 
with an early Supreme court decision, holding our free-state consti- 
tutions to be unconstitutional. 

Would Scott or Stephens go into the cabinet? And if yea, on 
what terms? Do they come to me? or I go to them? or are we to 
lead off in open hostility to each other? Yours truly 

A. 



1 ALS, IHi. John D. Defrees, chairman of the Indiana State Republican Com- 
mittee, wrote from Washington, December 15, that the threat of secession was 
greater than the West realized: "The fartherest any of our Republicans are 
willing to go is to secure genuine popular sovereignty to the people of our Ter- 
ritories not the Douglas sham. . . ." He added that many Republicans thought 
Scott of Virginia should be secretary of war and Stephens of Georgia should be 
secretary of the navy (DLC-RTL) . Both Robert E. Scott and General Winfield 
Scott were being mentioned for the cabinet. 

[155] 



To Henry J. Raymond 1 

Confidential 

Hon. H. J. Raymond Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Dec. 18, 1860 

Yours of the 14th. is received. What a very mad-man your cor- 
respondent, Smedes is. Mr. Lincoln is not pledged to the ultimate 
extinctinction [szc] of slavery; does not hold the black man to be 
the equal of the white, unqualifiedly as Mr. S. states it; and never 
did stigmatize their white people as immoral & unchristian; and 
Mr. S. can not prove one of his assertions true. 

Mr. S. seems sensitive on the questions of morals and Christian- 
ity. What does he think of a man who makes charges against an- 
other -which he does not know to be true, and could easily learn to 
be false? 

As to the pitcher story, it is a forgery out and out. I never made 
but one speech in Cincinnati the last speech in the volume con- 
taining the Joint Debates between Senator Douglas and myself. 2 
I have never yet seen Gov. Chase. I was never in a meeting of ne- 
groes in my life; and never saw a pitcher presented by anybody to 
anybody. 

I am much obliged by your letter, and shall be glad to hear from 
you again when you have anything of interest. Yours truly 

A. LmcouNr 

1 ALS-P, ISLA. Raymond's letter of December 14 enclosed a rabid communi- 
cation from William C. Smedes, Vicksburg, Mississippi, December 8, 1860, in 
which that member of the Mississippi legislature vowed he **. . . would regard 
death by a stroke of lightning to Mr Lincoln as but a just punishment from an 
offended deity. . . ." Smedes was particularly aroused by a speech purported to 
have been made by Lincoln when some free negroes presented a pitcher to 
Salmon P. Chase at Cincinnati (DLC-R.TL). The speech has appeared in collec- 
tions of Lincoln's works (Hertz, II, 531), as purportedly delivered at Cincin- 
nati, Ohio, May 6, 1842. Raymond's letter mentioned his having read it recently 
in the New York Herald, and asked whether it was authentic. According to bi- 
ographies of Chase the occasion was authentic, but Lincoln was not present; the 
speech in question having been made by Chase himself. 

2 Vide supra, September 17, 1859. Governor Chase was not present on any 
occasion during Lincoln's Ohio trip in September, 1859. See Lincoln to Chase, 
September 21, 1859, supra. 

Resolutions Drawn up for Republican Members 
of Senate Committee of Thirteen 1 

Resolved: [December 20, 1860] 

That the fugitive slave clause of the Constitution ought to be en- 
forced by a law of Congress, with efficient provisions for that ob- 

[156] 



DECEMBER 21, i860 

ject, not obliging private persons to assist in it's execution, but 
punishing all who resist it, and with the usual safeguards to liberty, 
securing free men against being surrendered as slaves 

That all state laws, if there be such, really, or apparantly, in 
conflict with such law of Congress, ought to be repealed; and no 
opposition to the execution of such law of Congress ought to be 
made 

That the Federal Union must be preserved. 



, NAuE. See Bancroft, Life of William H. Seiuard (1900) II, 10 See 
letter to Trumbull, December 21, infra, for circumstances under which the reso- 
lutions were composed. Seward wrote on December 26 that on December 24 he 
had offered first to the Republican members of the Committee of Thirteen, and 
afterwards the whole Committee, ". . . three propositions which seemed to me 
to cover the ground of the suggestion made by you through Mr Weed as I un- 
derstood it. First. That the constitution should never be altered so as to authorize 
Congress to abolish or interfere with slavery in the states. This was accepted. 
Second. That the Fugitive slave law should be amended by granting a jury trial 
to the fugitive. . . .** This was amended so as to name the jury from the state 
which the fugitive had fled, and was voted down by the Republicans. The third 
resolution that Congress should recommend that the states revise legislation 
concerning persons recently resident in the state and repeal all in conflict with 
the constitution was rejected. At another meeting on December 26, Seward 
continued, he had offered a fourth proposition to the effect that Congress should 
pass a law to prevent invasion of a state, which was amended and rejected. 
Whereupon the Republican members of the committee, together with Trum- 
bull and Fessenden, met to consider Lincoln's resolutions: "While we think the 
ground has already been covered we find that in the form you give it it would 
divide our friends not only in the Committee but in Congress, a portion being 
unwilling to give up their old opinion that the duty of executing the constitu- 
tional provisions concerning fugitives from service belongs to the States, and 
not at all to Congress. But we shall confer and act wisely as we can." (DLC- 
RTL). 



To Francis R Blair, Sr. 1 

Confidential 

Hon. F. E Blair, Ser. Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Dec. 21. 1860 

Yours giving an account of an interview with Gen. Scott, is re- 
ceived, and for which I thank you. According to my present view, 
if the forts shall be given up before the inaugeration, the General 
must retake them after wards. Yours truly A. 



1 ALS, owned by Blair Lee, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Blair wrote on De- 
cember 18 of his interview with James H. Van Alen of New York, who was on 
his way to Springfield with a letter from General Winfield Scott to Lincoln. 
Blair thought Lincoln might assure the country through Scott that he meant to 
defend the country against conspirators. The letter which Van Alen carried to 
Lincoln was probably the copy of Scott to President Buchanan, December 15, 

[157] 



DECEMBER 2 1 9 i860 

1860, endorsed by Scott with a note supplying what he omitted to say "this 
morning at the interview with . . . the President. . . ." The gist of this was 
that President Jackson had caused reinforcements to be sent to Fort Moultrie 
and Charleston Harbor, and had remarked that he was not making war on 
South Carolina, but that if South Carolina attacked, she would be warring on 
the United States (DLC-RTL). 



To Andrew G. Curtin 1 

Confidential 

Hon. A. G. Curtin Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Dec. 21. 1860 

Yours of the 14th. was only received last night. I am much 
obliged by your kindness in asking my views in advance of pre- 
paring your inaugeral. I think of nothing proper for me to suggest 
except a -word about this secession and disunion movement. On 
that subject, I think you would do well to express, without passion, 
threat, or appearance of boasting, but nevertheless, with firmness, 
the purpose of yourself, and your state to maintain the "Union at all 
hazzards. Also, if you can, procure the Legislature to pass resolu- 
tions to that effect. As \_sic"] [I] shall be very glad to see your 
friend, the Attorney General, 2 that is to be; but I think he need 
scarcely make a trip merely to confer with me on the subject you 
mention. Yours very truly A. 



1 ALS-P, I SLA. Curtin's letter of December 14 is in the Nicolay Papers 
(DLC) . 2 Samuel A. Purviance. 



To Lyman Trumbull 1 

Confidential 

Hon. Lyman Trumbull Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir. Dec. 21, 1860 

Thurlow Weed was with me nearly all day yesterday, & left at 
night with three short resolutions which I drew up, 2 and which, or 
the substance of which., I think would do much good, if introduced, 
and unanamously supported by our friends. They do not touch the 
territorial question. Mr. 'Weed goes to Washington with them; and 
says he will, first of all, confer with you and Mr. Hamlin. 8 I think 
it would be best for Mr. Seward to introduce them, & Mr. Weed 
will let him know that I think so. Show this to Mr. Hamlin; but 
beyond him, do not let my name be known in the matter. Yours 
as ever A. 

[158] 



DECEMBER 22, i860 

1 ALS, ICHi. Trumbull's letters of December 24 and 3 1 do not mention the 
resolutions, probably because lie knew of Seward's detailed letter of Decem- 
ber 26. 2 Vide supra. 

3 Hamlin wrote on December 27 that Weed had showed "him, the resolutions 
and that he approved them, excepting the word "apparently" in the second para- 
graph, which should be omitted (DLC-R.TL). 



To Elihu B. Washburne 1 

Confidential 

Hon. E. B. Washburne Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: Dec. 21. 1860 

Last night I received your letter giving an account of your inter- 
view with. Gen. Scott., and for which I thank you. Please present 
my respects to the General, and tell him, confidentially, I shall be 
obliged to him to be as well prepared as he can to either hold, or 
retake^ the forts, as the case may require, at, and after the in- 
augeration. Yours as ever A. LUNTCOUNT 

1 ALS, IHi. Washburne wrote on December 1 7 summarizing an interview 
with General Winfield Scott to the effect that Scott had recommended rein- 
forcement of the Charleston forts in October, that Fort Moultrie was practically 
defenseless, and that Fort Sumter with only five workmen in it was the key to 
the harbor. 



To David Huziter 1 

Confidential 

Major David Hunter, Springfield, Ills., Dec. 22, 1860. 

My dear Sir: I am much obliged by the receipt of yours of the 
i8th. The most we can do now is to watch events,, and be as well 
prepared as possible for any turn things may take. If the forts fall, 
my judgment is that they are to be retaken. When I shall deter- 
mine definitely my time of starting to Washington, I will notify 
you. Yours truly, A. 



1 Copy, DLC-Nicolay Papers. Major Hunter wrote again (vide supra y Oc- 
tober 2,6} on December 18 from Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, recounting the pur- 
ported scheme of Governor Henry A. Wise of Virginia in 1856 to prevent the 
inauguration of John C. Fremont in the event of his election, and suggesting 
the likelihood of a similar plan to employ force to prevent Lincoln's inaugura- 
tion. As a precaution he recommended that 100,000 Wide- Awakes be assem- 
bled in Washington to prevent such an incident. He also thanked Lincoln for 
an invitation to attend the inaugural. 

[159] 



To Peter H. Silvester 1 

Confidential 

Hon. E H. Silvester Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Dec. 22. 1860 

Your kind letter of Nov. 1 6th. was duly received. Want of time 
has delayed me so long before acknowledging the receipt of it. 
This, even now, is the most I can do. 

The political horizon looks dark and lowering; but the people, 
under Providence, will set all right. 

If Mr. B. surrenders the forts, I think they must be retaken. 
Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, owned by Mrs. Townsend Morey, Albany, New York. Silvester was a 
lawyer of Coxsackie, New York, and Whig congressman from New York, 1847- 
1851. 



To Alexander H. Stephens 1 

For your oiun eye only. 

Hon. A. H. Stephens Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Dec, 22, 1860 

Your obliging answer to my short note is just received, and for 
which please accept my thanks. I fully appreciate the present peril 
the country is in, and the weight of responsibility on me. 

Do the people of the South really entertain fears that a Repub- 
lican administration would, directly, or indirectly, interfere with 
their slaves, or with them, about their slaves? If they do, I wish to 
assure you, as once a friend, and still, I hope, not an enemy, that 
there is no cause for such fears. 

The South would be in no more danger in this respect, than it 
was in the days of Washington. I suppose, however, this does not 
meet the case. You think slavery is right and ought to be extended; 
while we think it is ivrong and ought to be restricted. That I sup- 
pose is the rub. It certainly is the only substantial difference be- 
tween us. Yours very truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, CSmH. Stephens' reply of December 30 is not in the Lincoln Papers, 
but a portion of it is given in Recollections of Alexander H. Stephens., edited by 
Myrta L. Avary (1910), p. 60, as follows: "Personally, I am not your enemy 
far from it; and however widely we may differ politically, yet I trust we both 
have an earnest desire to preserve and maintain the Union. . . . When men 
come under the influence of fanaticism, there is no telling where their impulses 
or passions may drive them. This is what creates our discontent and apprehen- 
sions, not unreasonable when we see . . . such reckless exhibitions of madness 

[160] 



DECEMBER 24, i860 

as the John Brown raid into Virginia, which has received so much sympathy 
from many, and no open condemnation from any of the leading members of the 
dominant party. ... In addressing you thus, I would have you understand me 
as being not a personal enemy, but as one who would have you do what you 
can to save our common country. A word fitly spoken by you now would be 
like 'apples of gold in pictures of silver.* " 



To Hannibal Hamlin 1 

Springfield, Illinois, December 24, 1860. 

My dear Sir: I need a man of Democratic antecedents from New 
England. I cannot get a fair share of that element in without. This 
stands in the way of Mr. Adams. 2 I think of Governor Banks, Mr. 
Welles, and Mr. Tuck. 3 Which of them do the New England dele- 
gation prefer? Or shall I decide for myself? Yours as ever, 

A. 



1 NH, VI, 86-87. Hamlin replied December 29 that he had ". . . no hesita- 
tion in saying that . . . Mr. Wells is the better man for New England . . ." 
(DLC-RTL). 

2 Charles Francis Adams, member of congress from Massachusetts. 

3 Amos Tuck, member of congress from New Hampshire, 1847-1853, who had 
been chairman of the New Hampshire delegation at the Chicago convention. 



To Isaac N. Morris 1 

Confidential 

Hon. I. N. Morris Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: Dec. 24, 1860 

"Without supposing that you and I are any nearer together, po- 
litically, than heretofore, allow me to tender you my sincere thanks 
for your Union resolution, expressive of views upon which we 
never were, and, I trust, never will be at variance. Yours very 
truly A. LiNCOLiNr. 

1 AL.S, owned by Edward C. Stone, Boston, Massachusetts. On December 17, 
Isaac N. Morris, Democratic member of congress from Quincy, Illinois, had 
offered a resolution in the House of Representatives, reading in part as follows: 
". . . That we properly estimate the immense value of our national Union to 
our collective and individual happiness . . . cherish a cordial . . . attachment 
to it ... will watch its preservation with jealous anxiety . . . that we have 
seen nothing in the past, nor . . . present, either in the election of Abraham 
Lincoln to the Presidency ... or from, any other existing cause, to justify its 
dissolution; that we regard its perpetuity as of more value than the temporary 
triumph of any party or any man. . . ." (Illinois State Journal, December 19, 
1860). The resolution passed 115 to 44. 

[161] 



To Lyman Trumbull 1 

Hon. Lyman Trumbull Springfield, Ills. Dec. 24, 1860 

My dear Sir I expect to be able to offer Mr. Blair a place in the 

cabinet; but I can not, as yet, be committed on the matter, to any 

extent whatever. 

Despaches have come here two days in succession, that the 

Forts in South Carolina, will be surrendered by the order, or con- 

sent at least, of the President. 

I can scarcely believe this; but if it prove true, I will, if our 

friends at Washington concur, announce publicly at once that they 

are to be retaken after the inaugeration. This will give the Union 

men a rallying cry, and preparation will proceed somewhat on 

their side, as well as on the other. Yours as ever 

A. 



1 ALS, CSmH. Trumbull wrote December 18, proposing that Montgomery 
Blair be made secretary of war (DL.C-RTL) . 



To Duff Green 1 

Gen. Duff Green. Springfield, 111. Dec 28th 1860. 

My dear Sir I do not desire any amendment of the Constitu- 
tion. Recognizing., however, that questions of such amendment 
rightfully belong to the American People, I should not feel justi- 
fied, nor inclined, to withhold from them, if I could, a fair oppor- 
tunity of expressing their will thereon, through either of the modes 
prescribed in the instrument. 

In addition I declare that the maintainance inviolate of the 
rights of the States, and especially the right of each state to order 
and control its own domestic institutions according to its own 
judgment exclusively, is essential to that balance of powers on 
which the perfection, and endurance of our political fabric depends 
and I denounce the lawless invasion, by armed force, of the soil 
of any State or Territory, no matter under what pretext, as the 
gravest of crimes. 

I am greatly averse to writing anything for the public at this 
time; and I consent to the publication of this, only upon the con- 
dition that six of the twelve United States Senators for the States 
of Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, Florida, and Texas 
shall sign their names to what is written on this sheet below my 
name, and allow the whole to be published together. Yours truly 

A. 

[162] 



DECEMBER 2 Q, i860 

We recommend to the people of the States -we represent respec- 
tively, to suspend all action for dismemberment of the Union, at 
least, until some act, deemed to be violative of our rights, shall be 
done by the incoming administration 

1 Copy, DLC-R.TL. This letter was enclosed with the letter to Trumbull, 
infra. It was never made public, and TrumbulPs letters in the Lincoln Papers 
(December 31, 1860, January 3, 7, and 16, 1861) make no mention of it. Green 
came to Springfield as an emissary of President Buchanan. The fact that his 
visit went unnoticed in the press suggests that great secrecy was observed by 
both sides. According to his later account given to the N"ew York Herald (Jan- 
uary 8, 1861), he was satisfied that Lincoln sincerely wished "to administer the 
government in such a manner as to satisfy the South. . . ." Green wrote Lin- 
coln on January 7, 1861, that he had received "... your letter of the 3ist Dec 
I regret your unwillingness to recommend an amendment to the constitution 
which will arrest the progress of secession. . . ." (DLC-RTL). Undoubtedly 
Green refers to this letter. Perhaps Trumbull handed him a copy under the 
later date. 



To Lyman Trurnbull 1 

Hon. Lyman Trumbull Springfield 111 Dec 2 8th 1860. 

My dear Sir Gen. Duff Green is out here endeavoring to draw 
a letter out of me. I have written one, which herewith I inclose 
to you, and which I believe could not be used to our disadvantage. 
Still, if, on consultation with our discreet friends, you conclude 
that it may do us harm, do not deliver it. 

You need not mention that the second clause of the letter is 
copied from the Chicago Platform. If, on consultation, our friends, 
including yourself, think it can do no harm, keep a copy and de- 
liver the letter to Gen. Green. Yours as ever A. LUNTCOUNT. 

1 Copy, DLC-RTL. See note to Green letter, supra. 



To William C. Bryant 1 

Springfield, Illinois, December 29, 1860. 

My dear Sir: Yours of the 25th is duly received. The "well- 
known politician" to whom I understand you to allude did write 
me, but not press upon me any such compromise as you seem to 
suppose, or, in fact, any compromise at all. 

As to the matter of the cabinet, mentioned by you, I can only 
say I shall have a great deal of trouble, do the best I can. 

I promise you that I shall unselfishly try to deal fairly with all 
men and all shades of opinion among our friends. Yours very truly, 

A. 

[163] 



DECEMBER 2 Q, i860 

1 NH, VI, 89. Bryant wrote on December 25: "The rumor having got abroad 
that you have been visited by a well known politician of New York who has a 
good deal to do with the stock market and who took with him a plan of com- 
promise manufactured in Wall Street, it has occurred to me that you might 
like to be assured of the manner in which those Republicans who have no con- 
nections with Wall Street regard a compromise on the slavery question. . . . 
The restoration of the Missouri Compromise would disband the Republican 
party. ..." Bryant added that he was glad the cabinet would have some Re- 
publicans of Democratic antecedents (DLC-RTL) . The "well known politician" 
was probably Thurlow Weed, who conferred with Lincoln on December 20. 

To William H. Seward 1 

Private 

Hon. W. H. Seward: Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Dec. 29. 1860 

Yours of the 25th. suggesting the names of Col. Fremont, and 
Messrs. Hunt, Raynor, and Gilmer for places in the Cabinet is re- 
ceived. I had thought of all of them before, but not very definitely 
of any except Mr. Gilmer. I wrote him, requesting him to visit me 
here; and my object was that if, on full understanding of my po- 
sition, he would accept a place in the cabinet, to give it to him. He 
has neither come, nor answered me. If you will ascertain his feel- 
ings, and write me, I shall be obliged. Our german friends might 
not be quite satisfied with his appointment, but I think we could 
appease them. Yours very truly A. LINCOLN 

iALS, NAuE. On December 25, Seward wrote Lincoln: "I feel it my duty 
to submit for your consideration the names of Col. Fremont for Secretary of 
War, Randall Hunt of Louisiana and John A Gilmer or Kenneth Raynor of 
North Carolina for other places. Should you think that any of these gentlemen 
would be likely to be desirable in the Administration, I should find no diffi- 
culty I think in ascertaining whether they would accept, without making the 
matter public. . . ." (DLC-RTL) . 

See Lincoln to Gilmer, December 15, supra, and to Seward, January 3 and 
12, 1861, infra. 

To James W. Webb 1 

Private 

Col. J. W. Webb. Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: Dec. 29. 1860 

Yours kindly seeking my view as to the proper mode of dealing 
with secession, was received several days ago, but, for want of 
time I could not answer it till now. I think we should hold the 
forts, or retake them, as the case may be, and collect the revenue. 
We shall have to forego the use of the federal courts, and they that 
of the mails, for a while. We can not fight them in to holding 
courts, or receiving the mails. 

[164] 



DECEMBER 3 1, i860 

This is an outline of my view; and perhaps suggests sufficiently, 
the whole of it. Yours very truly A. 



1 ALS, CtY. James W. Webb wrote from N"ew York, December 24, seeking 
Lincoln's views and stating that he was editor of the New York Courier and En- 
quirer (DLC-RTL). 

Memorandum on the Charges 
against Simon Cameron 1 

[c. December 31, 1860] 

At the election of Senator in Pennsylvania in 1857 General C. 
bribed three members of the Legislature Lebo, Mancer, and 
Wagonsella; and part of the consideration paid is now in the 
hands of William B. Mann of Philadelphia. Bonds A Mr. Mo 
Aber, received the Bonds from General C. for the purpose of cor- 
rupting the Legislature. The bonds in Mann's hands were either 
paid to members, or or [szc] retained by McAber, for compensa- 
tion as a go between. McAber will swear to all this. The witness 
was afterward bribed by General C. through John B. Beck, brother- 
in-law of the witness. A Mr. Johns, a member at the next session, 
moved to investigate this matter, and was bribed out of it by Gen- 
eral C. 
Witness J. C. Bonbager Cashiered. 

If Pollock will give his word that he believes General C. to be 
personally and politically an honest man and whether he believes 
his ? is the result of honest dealing, 2 

Look to report of investigation of 1855 an d Protest Winne- 
bago matter. 

In 1849, i* 1 Q- Democratic Convention, he attempted to bribe a 
convention. 

1 Copy, DLC-Nicolay Papers. Nicolay's copy of this memorandum is, together 
with the copy of the memorandum summarizing the recommendations in 
Cameron's favor (infra) labeled "aut. MS.," and given a headnote as follows: 
"Orig. in envelope 'Presidential Dec. 1860.' ("Written in pencil and endorsed on 
back, 'In regard to Cameron') (Pinned to other sheets.)" "Written in the left- 
hand margin of the first page is an additional note, "W". B. Mann and C. C. 
Gary know of this/also Dr. Eckart." Whether this notation was Nicolay's or a 
copy of Lincoln's notation is uncertain. Although Lincoln's autograph memo- 
randum of the favorable recommendations as reproduced infra, is still in the 
Lincoln Papers, the original from which Nicolay made his copy of the unfavor- 
able memorandum has disappeared and may have been destroyed by Robert 
Todd Lincoln 

2 The sentence is left incomplete, followed by a vacant line. The question 
mark is in the source. 

[165] 




Memorandum on the Appointment 
of Simon Cameron 1 

[c. December 31, 1860] 
/. K. Moor head M.C. 

"I have no hesitation in saying that if Penna. receives the honor, 
it should be in the person of Genl. Cameron." 

Wm. Nichols. 

G. Rush Smith. ^. ^ Joint letter from Philada. 

Jno. H. Parker 
Geo. Conwell 

"He (Cameron) is the universally acknowledged head and rep- 
resentative man of the 'Peoples Party' of the State; and it is not 
only the desire of the people of the State, in view of the position he 
thus occupies, as well as his practical business qualifications and 
life devotion to the material interests of the state, that he should 
be at the head of the Treasury Department under your administra- 
tion, but also of the great body of your friends in this city" 

", " 7 T ^ 77 Joint letter from, Germans, Propri[e]tor, Ed- 

TheodoreKell . D ^ ., ' ~ -, A r--i * 

-> T \- itor & President or Rep. Assoc li I ation at 

P.!. JUOeS TYI -1 3 

n _* 7-r 7 Pmlada. 

Peter Ford J 

"Feeling assured as we do that the appointment of the Hon 
Simon Cameron would be hailed with joy by the citizens of this 
state, and that it would secure to our city and our state future tri- 
umphs for the Republican party, we respectfully present his name 
for your kind and favorable consideration. 
Jos. Casey Harrisburg Ex. M.C. & Del. to Chicago. 

Many letters from him. 
/. S. Haldeman Fairview. Former Pa. Pres. of State Ag. Soc. & 

Del. to Chicago. Long letter. 
/. P. Sanderson Philada. 
Wm. F. Small Philada. Long Letter. 
John Z. Goodrich Stockbridge, Mass. Long letter 
Charles T. Jones Philada. Letter. 
Russell Essett Pittsburgh. Letter. 

Francis Blackburne, Philada. Del. to Chicago. Long letter. 
Levi Kline Lebanon, Pa. Del to C. & Corn-man. Long letter. 

Hazelhurst, Philada. Letter. 
Isaac. G. Gordon Brookville, Pa. Rep in Leg. Letter 

[166] 



DECEMBER 31, i860 

David Wilmot. Towanda. Pa. Letter. 

A. H. Reeder Eastern, Pa. Letters & visit. 

Leonard Ulmer. Williamsport, Pa. Letter 

7. W. Killinger, M.C. Lebanon, Pa. Letter 

John M. Butler, M.C. almost, Philada. Letter 

Henry D. Moore. State. Treasurer, that is to be. Phil. Letter. 

/. L. Rightmyer 1 

Jesse Hillman -r^r--,-,. ^ -* - 

r TJJ > W illiamsport, Pa. Joint letter. 

S. H. "Walters J 

Jno. A Hiestand. Editor Lancaster, Pa. Letter. 

Geo. A. Coffey Phil Letter 

A. R. Mcllvaine. Ex. M.C. Brandywine Manor Pa. Letter. 

Geo. R. Hendrichson Mountjoy Lancaster Co. Pa. Letter. 

John M. Butler 1 

Wm. Elliott T * i + 4- f -D-u-i 

T 7 o 7i /r r- Joint letter from Phil. 

Joseph S. jvLorey 

E. Ward } 

John W. Wallace. New Castle, Pa. Letter 
G. L. Vliet. Woodbury N.J. Letter. 
Robert M. Palmer "] 

Jacob G. Frick \ T\ -i + ^T,* T *.*. * T> ** -n -D 

A n I Dels, to Chicago. Letter from Pottsville Pa. 

S. A. Bergstresser f & 

Wm. C. Laiuson J 

G. Rush Smith Phil Letter. 

John C. Myers. Editor Reading Pa. Letter 

John Strohm, Ex. M.C. Lancaster Co. Pa. Letter 

E. Rush Petrikin. Pa. Letter 

Wm. B. Thomas Pres. of Rep. Cent Club, Phil. Letter. 

Wm. H. Kerr. Sheriff of Phil. City & Co. Letter 

Daniel G. Thomas. Rep. in Leg. Phil. Letter 

R. P. King Elector Phil. Letter. 

James M. Moore. Phil Letter. 

David Taggart y Elector Northumberland, Pa. Letter 

Joseph Buffington. Kittaning Pa. Letter 

John F. Long Lancaster Pa. Letter. 

Hon. F. P. Stanton. Letter. 

James Pollock. Ex. MC. & Ex. Gov. Milton, Pa. Letter. 

David Mumma. Jr. Head elector, Harrisburg, Pa. Letter. 

1 AD, DLC-RTL. The approximate date of this memorandum, like that of the 
preceding one, is supplied on the basis of Lincoln's letter to Cameron (infrci) 
and of the fact that during December he had considered the pros and cons of 
the appointment as summarized in the memoranda themselves. 

[167] 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Simon Cameron Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: Dec. 31, 1860 

I think fit to notify you now, that by your permission, I shall, 
at the proper time, nominate you to the U.S. Senate, for confirma- 
tion as Secretary of the Treasury, or as Secretary of War which 
of the two, I have not yet definitely decided. Please answer at your 
own earliest convenience. Your Obt. Servt. A. LINCOLN 

i ALS, DLC-Cameron Papers. There is no reply to this in the Lincoln Papers. 
Cameron had visited Lincoln together with Edward Bates the day before. See 
Lincoln to Cameron, January 3, 1861, for Lincoln's withdrawal of his offer. 

To Salmon K Chase 1 

Hon. S. P. Chase Springfield, 111,, December 31, 1860. 

My dear Sir: In these troublous times, I would [much] 2 like a 
conference with you. Please visit me here at once. Yours very 
truly, A. LINCOLN. 

i NH, VI, 90; Robert B. Warden, Account of the Private Life and Public 
Services of Salmon Portland Chase (1874), p. 364. Chase replied January 2 that 
he would come to Springfield the next day (DLC-RTL). On January 5, he con- 
ferred with Lincoln about his appointment to the cabinet, and left without ac- 
cepting or rejecting the offer 2 Not in Warden. 

Endorsement : 
Jesse K. Dubois and William Butler to Lincoln 1 

[January ? 1861] 

Do not think any objection to Turner of enough, importance to 
have a squabble over. A. LINCOLN 

1 AES, IHi. Dubois 7 undated letter, signed also by Butler, recommended 
Stephen T. Logan, John Wood, John M. Palmer, Burton C. Cook, and David 
Davis as the Illinois delegates to the Peace Convention to be held in Washing- 
ton in February, but noted that Governor Richard Yates wanted "to select 
[Thomas J.] Turner in place of Davis. . . . We want your personal friends on 
the commission and not men opposed to you." (ALS, IHi). Thomas J. Turner 
of Freeport, Illinois, was a Democrat, U.S. representative 1847-1849 and speaker 
of the Illinois House of Representatives 1854-1856. 

Fragment on the Constitution and the Union 1 

[c. January", 1861] 

All this is not the result of accident. It has a philosophical cause. 
Without the Constitution and the Union., we could not have at- 

[168] 



JANUARY 3, l86l 

tained the result; but even these, are not the primary cause of our 
great prosperity. There is something back of these, entwining it- 
self more closely about the human heart. That something, is the 
principle of "Liberty to all" the principle that clears the path for 
all gives hope to all and, by consequence, enterprise, and in- 
dustry to all. 

The expression of that principle, in our Declaration of Inde- 
pendence, was most happy, and fortunate. Without this, as "well 
as ivith it, we could have declared our independence of Great Brit- 
tain; but ivithout it, we could not, I think., have secured our free 
government, and consequent prosperity. No oppressed, people will 
fight, and endure, as our fathers did, without the promise of some- 
thing better, than a mere change of masters. 

The assertion of that principle, at that time, was the word, "fitly 
spoken" which has proved an "apple of gold" to us. The Union, 
and the Constitution, are the picture of silver, subsequently 
framed around it. The picture was made, not to conceal, or destroy 
the apple; but to adorn, and preserve it. The picture was made for 
the apple not the apple for the picture. 

So let us act, that neither picture, or apple shall ever be blurred, 
or bruised or broken. 

That we may so act, we must study, and understand the points 
of danger. 

1 AD, ORB. This fragment may have been written earlier than January, 
1861. The only clue in the context as to a date is Lincoln's allusion to the 
metaphor in Proverbs 25:11, which Alexander Stephens had used in his letter 
to Lincoln of December 30, 1860 (vide supra., Lincoln to Stephens, December 
22, note). No speech which employs the language of the fragment has been 
found, but it seems probable that Lincoln wrote the passage some time prior to 
or during the preparation of his First Inaugural Address. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Private (Copy) 

Hon. Simon Cameron Springfield, Ills. Jan. 3, 1861 

My dear Sir Since seeing you things have developed which 
make it impossible for me to take you into the cabinet. You will 
say this comes of an interview with McClure; and this is partly, 
but not wholly true. The more potent matter is wholly outside of 
Pennsylvania; and yet I am not at liberty to specify it. Enough 
that it appears to me to be sufficient. And now I suggest that you 
write me declining the appointment, in which case I do not object 

[169] 



JANUARY 3, l86l 

to its being known that it was tendered you. Better do this at once, 
before things so change, that you can not honorably decline, and 
I be compelled to openly recall the tender. No person living knows, 
or has an intimation that I write this letter. Yours truly 

A. LirccorjNT 

P.S. Telegraph, me instantly, on receipt of this, saying "All 
right" A. L. 

1 AJ,$ copy, DLC-RTL. Lincoln apparently sent a telegram at the time he 
wrote the letter, for Cameron replied January 5 that he had received the dis- 
patch and was awaiting the letter (DLC-RTL). There are no further letters 
from Cameron in the Lincoln Papers prior to March 4, 1861. See Lincoln's sec- 
ond letter under date of January 3, which was actually written on January 13 
and enclosed with Lincoln's letter to Cameron of January 13, infra. 



To William H. Seward 1 

Private 
Hon. W. H. Seward Springfield, Ills. Jan. 3. 1861 

My dear Sir: Yours without signature was received last night. I 
have been considering your suggestions as to my reaching Wash- 
ington somewhat earlier than is usual. It seems to me the inauge- 
ration is not the most dangerous point for us. Our adversaries have 
us more clearly at disadvantage, on the second Wednesday of Feb- 
ruary, when the votes should be officially counted. If the two 
Houses refuse to meet at all, or meet without a quorum of each, 
where shall we be? I do not think that this counting is constitu- 
tionally essential to the election; but how are we to proceed in 
absence of it? 

In view of this, I think it is best for me not to attempt appear- 
ing in Washington till the result of that ceremony is known. 

It certainly would be of some advantage if you could know who 
are to be at the heads of the War and Navy Departments; but 
until I can ascertain definitely whether I can get any suitable men 
from the South? and who? and how many? I can not -well decide. 
As yet, I have no word from Mr. Gilmer, in answer to my request 
for an interview with him. I look for something on the subject, 
through you, before long. Yours very truly A. LINCOLN. 

1 ALS, NAuE. Seward's letter of December 29, without signature, informed 
Lincoln of a plot to seize the capital on or before March 4, and added "... I 
am not giving you opinions and rumors. Believe that I know what I write. . . . 
I therefore renew my suggestion of your coming here earlier than you other- 
wise would and coming in by surprise without announcement." Seward fur- 
ther suggested 'that he be informed of Lincoln's choice of secretaries for War and 

[170] 



JANUARY 7, l86l 

INTavy and that they be advised to come to Washington as soon as possible. On 
January i, he wrote that Gilmer had gone home but that he would see "him 
". . . as soon as he returns." (DLC-RTL). 



To Lyman Trumbull 1 

Very Confidential 

Hon. Lyman Trumbull Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Jan. 7. 1861 

Yours of the 3rd. is just received. The democrats of our H.B.. re- 
fused to make a quorum today, trying, as I understand, to prevent 
your re-election. I trust that before this reaches you, the telegraph 
will have informed you that they have failed, and you have tri- 
umphed. 

Gen. C. has not been offered the Treasury, and, I think, will not 
be. It seems to me not only highly proper, but a necessity., that 
Gov. Chase shall take that place. His ability, firmness, and purity 
of character, produce the propriety; and that he alone can recon- 
cile Mr. Bryant, and his class, to the appointment of Gov. S. to 
the State Department produces the necessity. But then comes the 
danger that the protectionists of Pennsylvania will be dissatisfied; 
and, to clear this difficulty, Gen. C. must be brought to co-operate. 
He would readily do this for the V^ar Department. But then comes 
the fierce opposition to his having any Department, threatening 
even to send charges into the Senate to procure his rejection by 
that body. Now, what I would most like, and what I think he 
should prefer too, under the circumstances, would be to retain his 
place in the Senate; and if that place has been promised to another, 
let that other take a respectable, and reasonably lucrative place 
abroad. Also let Gen. C's friends be, with entire fairness, cared for 
in Pennsylvania, and elsewhere. 

I may mention before closing that besides the very fierce op- 
position to Gen. C. he is more amply recommended for a place in 
the cabinet, than any other man. 

I have a great notion to post Judd fully in this matter, and get 
him to visit Washington, and in his quiet way, try to adjust it satis- 
factorily. Yours as ever A. 



1 ALS, ICHi. Trumbull -wrote on December 31 that the probable appointment 
of Cameron as ". . . Sec. of Treasury meets with the decided opposition of our 
truest friends in the Senate. . . ." On January 3, he wrote that the appoint- 
ment of Cameron was regarded as an accomplished fact, but that **.,.! shall 
not be surprised if a very strong protest against it reaches you from Pa. . . ." 
(DLC-RTL). 

[171] 



To James T. Hale 1 

Confidential. 

Hon. J. T. Hale Springfield, 111. Jan'y. nth 1861. 

My dear Sir Yours of the 6th is received. I answer it only be- 
cause I fear you would misconstrue my silence. What is our pres- 
ent condition? We have just carried an election on principles fairly 
stated to the people. Now we are told in advance, the government 
shall be broken up, unless we surrender to those we have beaten, 
before we take the offices. In this they are either attempting to play 
upon us, or they are in dead earnest. Either way, if we surrender, 
it is the end of us, and of the government. They will repeat the 
experiment upon us ad libitum. A year will not pass, till we shall 
have to take Cuba as a condition upon which they will stay in the 
Union. They now have the Constitution, under which we have 
lived over seventy years, and acts of Congress of their own fram- 
ing, with no prospect of their being changed; and they can never 
have a more shallow pretext for breaking up the government, or 
extorting a compromise, than now. There is, in my judgment, but 
one compromise which would really settle the slavery question, and 
that would be a prohibition against acquiring any more territory. 
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN. 

1 Copy, DLC-R.TL* James T. Hale, Republican congressman from Bellefonte, 
Pennsylvania, wrote January 6 as a member of a committee of congressmen 
from the Border states, recommending an amendment to the Constitution deny- 
ing the right of Congress to abolish slavery in the states, a joint resolution de- 
claring that abolition could not take place in the District of Columbia without 
consent of Maryland and citizens of the District, an amendment of the fugitive 
slave law and that states repeal all personal liberty bills, and that the U.S. be 
divided at 36 30', all territories north of that line to be free and all those 
south of it to be free or slave as they chose (DLC-BTL) . 



To Winfield Scott 1 

Springfield, 111. 
Lieutenant General Winfield Scott: Jany nth 1861. 

My dear Sir I herewith beg leave to acknowledge the receipt of 
your communication of the 4th inst. enclosing (documents Nos. i, 
2 ? 3? 4? 5? and 6) copies of correspondence and notes of conver- 
sation with the President of the United States and the Secretary 
of War, concerning various military movements., suggested by 
yourself 5 for the better protection of the Government and the main- 
tainance of public order. 

[172] 



JTAINTUARY 12, l86l 

Permit me to renew to you the assurance of my high apprecia- 
tion of the many past services you have rendered the Union, and 
of my deep gratification at this evidence of your present active 
exertions to maintain the integrity and honor of the nation. 

I shall be highly pleased to receive from time to time, such com- 
munications from yourself as you may deem it proper to make to 
me. Very truly your obt. servt. A. LINCOLN 

1 Copy, DLC-RTL. General Scott's letter of January 4 is not in the Lincoln 
Papers. The numbered documents referred to in Lincoln's letter are copies of 
communications (No. i) to President Buchanan, December 15, 1860; (No. 2) 
to the Secretary of War, December 28, 1860; (No. 3) Buchanan to Scott, De- 
cember 30, 1860; (No. 4) Scott to Buchanan, December 31, 1860; (No. 5) 
Scott to Buchanan, December 30, 1860; (No. 6) Buchanan to Scott, December 
31, 1860 all cataloged by date and dealing with the holding of Fort Sumter 
(DLC-RTL). 



To William H. Seward 1 

Private 

Hon. W. H. Seward Springfield, Ills. Jan. 12. 1861 

My dear Sir Yours of the 8th received. I still hope Mr. Gilmer 
will, on a fair -understanding with us, consent to take a place in the 
Cabinet. The preference for him over Mr. Hunt or Mr. Gentry, 2 is 
that, up to date, he has a living position in the South, while they 
have not. He is only better than Winter Davis in that he is farther 
South. I fear if we could get, we could not safely take more 
than one such man that is, not more than one who opposed us in 
the election the danger being to lose the confidence of our own 
friends. 

Your selection for the State Department having become public, 
I am happy to find scarcely any objection to it. I shall have trouble 
with every other Northern cabinet appointment so much so that 
I shall have to defer them as long as possible, to avoid being teased 
to insanity to make changes. Your obt. servt A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, NAuE. Seward had written on January 4: "Mr G. of N.C. says lie 
will consider of the proposition and that he trusts that before giving an answer 
he will be able to name a person better calculated than himself for the purpose 
indicated. . . . He will not reply further until required to do so by you directly 
or indirectly. . . ." Again on January 8 Seward "wrote: "Mr. Gilmer has 
written home confidentially and will give me an answer in a few days. ..." 
(DLC-RTL). 

2 Randall Hunt, a New Orleans attorney who later became President of the 
University of Louisiana (1867-1884) and Meredith P. Gentry, "Whig ex-con- 
gressman (1839-1843; 1845-1853) from Tennessee. 

[173] 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Private <& confidential. 

Hon. Simon Cameron Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: Jan. 13. 1861 

At the suggestion of Mr. Sanderson, 2 and with hearty good-will 
besides, I herewith send you a letter dated Jan. 3rd. the same in 
date, as the last you received from me. I thought best to give it 
that date, as it is, in some sort, to take the place of that letter. I 
learn, both, by a letter of Mr. Swett, and from Mr. Sanderson, that 
your feelings were wounded by the terms of ray letter really of the 
3rd. I wrote that letter under great anxiety, and perhaps I was not 
as guarded in it's terms as I should have been; but I beg you to 
be assured, I intended no offence. My great object was to have 
you act quickly if possible, before the matter should be com- 
plicated with the Penn. Senatorial election. Destroy the offensive 
letter, 3 or return it to me. 

I say to you now I have not doubted that you would perform 
the duties of a Department ably and faithfully. Nor have I for a 
moment intended to ostracise your friends. If I should make a cabi- 
net appointment for Penn. before I reach Washington, I will not 
do so without consulting you, and giving all the weight to your 
views and wishes which I consistently can. This I have always in- 
tended. Yours truly A. LINCOLN. 

[Enclosure"] 

Hon. Simon Cameron Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: Jan. 3. 1861 

When you were here about the last of December, I handed you 
a letter saying I should at the proper time, nominate you to the 
Senate for a place in the cabinet. It is due to you, and to truth, for 
me to say you were here by my invitation, and not upon any sug- 
gestion of your own. You have not, as yet, signified to me, whether 
you would accept the appointment; and, with much pain, I now 
say to you, that you will relieve me from great embarrassment by 
allowing me to recall the offer. This springs from an unexpected 
complication; and not from any change of my view as to the abil- 
ity or faithfulness with which you would discharge the duties of 
the place. 

I now think I will not definitely fix upon any appointment for 
Pennsylvania until I reach Washington. Your Obt. Servt. 

A. 



1 ALS, DLG-Cameron Papers. 

2 John P. Sanderson, state senator and one of Cameron's confidential friends, 

[174] 



JANUARY ig, l86l 

who Had visited Lincoln on January 12 to reinforce Cameron's claim to an ap- 
pointment. 

3 Apparently Cameron did destroy this letter, but Lincoln had preserved a 
copy (q v. 9 January 3, supra) . 



To John E. Wool 1 

General John E. Wool Springfield, Ills. Jany. 14. 1861 

My dear Sir: Many thanks for your patriotic and generous letter 
of the nth. Inst. As to how far the military force of the govern- 
ment may become necessary to the preservation of the Union; and, 
more particularly, how that force can best be directed to the ob- 
ject, I must rely chiefly upon Gen. Scott and yourself. It affords me 
the profoundest satisfaction to know, that with both of you, judg- 
ment and feeling, go heartily with your sense of professional and 
official duty, to the work. 

It is true that I have given but little attention to the Military 
Department of government; but, be assured, I can not be ignorant 
as to who is Gen. Wool, or what he has done. 

With nay highest esteem and gratitude, I subscribe myself 
Your Obt. Servt. A. 



1 ALS, IHi; copy, DLC-BTL. General Wool wrote on January 11 enclosing 
two printed letters containing his views, and added ". . . with me the preserva- 
tion of the Union is paramount; and ... I am. prepared against all threats to 
see you safely placed in the Presidential chair ... if my services as military 
commander ... be deemed necessary." He added in a postscript, "Lest you 
may not know the part I have acted in behalf of my country, I send you ... a 
pamphlet. . . ." (DLC-RTL). 

To John G. Nicolay 1 

[January 14, 1861] 

Mr. Nicolay will please make two copies of Gen, Wool's letter, 
and one copy of my answer to it. Li^srcoLisr 

i AES, DLC-RTL. 

Remarks Concerning Concessions to Secession 1 

[c. January 19-21, 1861] 

I learn from a gentleman who had an interview with Mr. Lin- 
coln, at Springfield, within the past week that the latter in dis- 
cussing the existing state of affairs expressed himself as follows: 
"I will suffer death before I will consent or will advise my 
friends to consent to any concession or compromise which looks like 

[175] 



JANUARY 19, l86l 

buying the privilege of taking possession of this government to 
which we have a constitutional right; because, whatever I might 
think of the merit of the various propositions before Congress, I 
should regard any concession in the face of menace the destruction 
of the government itself, and a consent on all hands that our system 
shall be brought down to a level with the existing disorganized 
state of affairs in Mexico. But this thing will hereafter be as it is 
now, in the hands of the people; and if they desire to call a Con- 
vention to remove any grievances complained of, or to give new 
guarantees for the permanence of vested rights, it is not mine to 
oppose." 

1 New York Herald^ January 28, 1861. Although not a public pronouncement, 
these remarks, dated at Washington, January 27, were given such prominence 
in the press that they assumed the proportions of a public statement. Both the 
New York Tribune (February 4-28) and Chicago Tribune (February 9-21) 
carried the opening statement under "Mottoes for the Day" as a more or less 
official pronouncement. Representative William Kellogg who had conferred 
with Lincoln on compromise, January 19-21, was probably the "gentleman" 
who gave the text of Lincoln's remarks to the Herald. 



To William H. Seward 1 

Private 

Hon. W. H. Seward Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Jan. 19. 1861 

Your two letters in relation to Gen. Cameron, are received. I 
have written him, by the hand of a confidential friend of his, in a 
way which I suppose will be satisfactory to him. 

Your recent speech 2 is well received here; and, I think, is doing 
good all over the country. 

I am glad of the opinion, expressed in your letter that the se- 
cessionists are already in danger of reaction. Yours truly 

A. 



1 ALS, NAuE. Seward had written on January 13 that Cameron "very 
much grieved by the result of the proposition to him of a Cabinet place. . . ." 
would now insist that neither New Jersey nor Pennsylvania have a place in 
the cabinet, and that "by some explanation to be made to him he shall ... be 
put before the public in a position as strong as he was before he was invited to 
go to Springfield . . ." Again on January 15, Seward wrote, "... I now 
learn that there is a movement to satisfy you that it would be wise to appoint 
a gentleman in N Jersey . . . desired also by Pennsylvania. ... I should 
dread exceedingly the army of Camerons friends in hostility. ..." (DLC- 
RTL). 

2 Seward's speech in the Senate on January 12, outlining his conciliatory 
views on enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Law, the admission of territories, and 
the passing of laws to prevent invasion of states. 

[176] 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Simon Cameron. Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Jan. 21. 1861 

I shall be obliged if you will visit me again at this place. Your 
Obt. Servt. A. 



1 ALS, DLC-RTL. Evidently this letter was not sent. The envelope bears 
Nicolay's notation: "Found sealed and opened/by me Sept 26th iS/S/Jno.G. 
Nicolay." 

To Peter Page 1 

Private 

Peter Page, Esq. Springfield, Jany. 2ist, 1861. 

Dear Sir: While an almost overvv-helniing amount of business 
and correspondence has prevented my sooner answering your let- 
ter of the 3d inst., you may rest assured that it has neither been 
forgotten nor overlooked. Permit me now to return you my heart- 
felt thanks for your very generous offer of both personal service 
and pecuniary aid, to secure my inauguration. While it is a very 
gratifying personal compliment to myself, I prize it more highly 
as an evidence of the public loyalty and devotion to our Govern- 
ment which I am confident almost unanimously pervades the peo- 
ple of this state. Happily, I think there is no immediate necessity 
for employing the proffered help, and while I hope the ten thou- 
sand dollars you propose to give may always be employed in the 
peaceful channels of business or commerce, I am pleased to have 
the assurance that in the event of trouble or danger, you and others 
stand ready to give both your lives and your fortunes to the de- 
fense and maintenance of the government and the Union. Your 
obedient Servant, A. LINCOLN. 

1 Hertz, II, 802. Peter Page, a real estate dealer in Chicago, wrote January 
3 to offer his personal services as a bodyguard and to be "one of one hundred 
in Chicago to raise ten thousand dollars each, rather than to submit to the hu- 
miliating demands of the South. . . ." (DLC-RTL). 



To Matias Romero 1 

Mr. Matias Romero. Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir: Jan. 21. 1861 

Allow me to thank you for your polite call, as Charge d' Affaires 
of Mexico. While, as yet I can do no official act on behalf of the 
United States, as one of it's citizens, I tender the expression of my 

[177] 



JTAJNTtJARY 22, l86l 

sincere wishes for the happiness, prosperity, and liberty of your- 
self, your government, and its people. Your Obt. Servt 

A. LIISTCOUN* 

1 ALS, IHi. Upon instructions from President Benito P. Juarez to **. . . pro- 
ceed to the place of residence of President-elect Lincoln and in the name of 
this government ... to make clear . . . the desire which animates President 
Juarez, of entering into the most cordial relations. . . .", Romero made a trip 
from Washington to Springfield and conferred with Lincoln on January 19 and 
21 (Ocampo to Romero, December 22, 1860, Reservada, Numero 17, Archivo de 
Relationes Esteriores, Mexico, D.F.). 

To S. Austin Allibone 1 

S. Austin Allibone, Esq Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Jan. 22/61 

Yours of the i8th. with the manuscript letter of Genl. Wool, 
herewith returned, and newspaper slips, is received; and for all 
which, please accept my thanks. A few days since I received a 
highly valued letter from Gen. Wool himself, which, being marked 
"private" perhaps it were better not to speak of publicly. Yours 
truly A. LirsrcoLiNT 

1 ALS, MH-Nolen Collection. Samuel Austin Allibone, author and merchant 
at Philadelphia, wrote January 8 quoting recent letters from General John E. 
Wool and enclosing clippings. Since there is no letter of January 18, Lincoln 
was probably in error as to the date (DLC-RTL). 

To Diplomatic Agents of the United States 1 

United States of America 
State of Illinois 

Springfield, Jany. 22, 1861 

To all Diplomatic Agents of the United States of America in 
Europe. 

Gentlemen: This will introduce to you C. M. Hardy Esq, a citi- 
zen of the State of Illinois, and United States of America, who goes 
on a tour of travel through Europe during the coming summer. 

Mr. Hardy is reliably recommended to me as a highly intelli- 
gent, worthy and honorable gentleman; and any assistance or 
favor you may render him. will be kindly remembered by himself 
and give me much gratification. 

With high consideration I subscribe myself Your obt. Servt. 

A. 



1 ALS-P, ISLA. Charles M. Hardy of Rock Island, Illinois, wished to spend a 
summer in Europe (Hardy to Lincoln, January i, 1861, DLC-RTL). 

[178] 



To Isaac Fenno 1 

Private 

Isaac Fenno Esq Springfield 111. 

Dear Sir Jany 22 1861 

Your note of the ist inst., together with a very substantial and 
handsome overcoat which accompanied it by Express, were duly 
received by me, and would both have been acknowledged sooner 
but for the multifarious demands upon my time and attention. 

Permit me now to thank you sincerely for your elegant and 
valuable New Year's Gift, and the many kind expressions of per- 
sonal confidence and regard contained in your letter. Your obt 
Servt. A. 



1 LS, ICU. No correspondence from Fenno is in the Lincoln Papers, but he 
has been identified as a wholesale clothing dealer at Boston, Massachusetts. 



Remarks to an Indiana Delegation 1 

January 22, 1861 

Another Indiana delegation made their appearance this morn- 
ing, consisting of a legislative committee, appointed under a joint 
resolution, to invite Mr. Lincoln to pass through the capital of the 
Hoosier State while on his way to Washington. They were re- 
ceived by the President elect in the course of the forenoon. In reply 
to their invitation, he stated that circumstances had as yet pre- 
vented him from definitely selecting any particular route; that he 
had seriously thought of going via Indianapolis, and would let 
them know his final decision in the course of the next fortnight. 

1 New York Herald., January 28, 1861. 



Remarks to a Pennsylvania Delegation 1 

January 24, 1861 

Dr. SMITH, Chairman of the Committee, 2 stated to Mr. LINCOLN 
the purpose of the resolutions intrusted to the care of the Commit- 
tee, and had reached the point where it was stated that Pennsyl- 
vania desired to have in the Cabinet one who had ever "been true 
to her interests, when Mr. LmcouNT interrupted him by saying: 

"Yes, I know who you allude to Gen. CAMEROK. This subject 
has already engaged a large share of my attention, and I have 
every reason to hope that your wishes will be gratified. I feel a 

[179] 



JANUARY 24, l86l 

strong desire to do something for your big State, and I am de- 
termined she shall be satisfied, if I can do it." 

The resolutions were read to him, when he continued, nearly in 
this language: 

"Gentlemen, in the formation of my Cabinet, I shall aim as 
nearly as possible at perfection. Any man whom I may appoint to 
such a position, must be, as far as possible, like Caesar's wife, pure 
and above suspicion, of unblemished reputation, and undoubted 
integrity. I have already appointed Senator SEWARD and Mr. 
BATES, of Missouri, and they are men whose characters I think the 
breath of calumny cannot impeach. In regard to Gen. CAMERON, 
I have received assurances without limit from gentlemen whose 
word is entitled to credit, that he is eminently fitted for the posi- 
tion which his friends desire him to fill, and that his appointment 
would give great satisfaction to Pennsylvania. I have a great desire 
to appoint Gen. CAMERON, for the reason that he was formerly a 
Democrat, and I wish to give that element a fair representation in 
the distribution of the offices. Both Mr. SEWARD and Mr. BATES 
were formerly old line "Whigs, and, for this reason, I feel a dispo- 
sition to appoint Gen. CAMERON. But on the other hand, there is a 
strong opposition to him; not from his own State, it is true, for the 
opposition to him there is so slight that it is scarcely worth men- 
tioning. The feeling against him appears to come from Ohio, and 
one or two of the other Western States. His opponents charge him 
with corruption in obtaining contracts, and contend that if he is 
appointed he will use the patronage of his office for his own pri- 
vate gain. I have no knowledge of the acts charged against him, but 
I intend to make an investigation of the whole matter, by allowing 
his opponents to submit their proof, and I shall give him an op- 
portunity of explaining any part he may have had in the transac- 
tions alleged against him. For my own part, I can see no impropri- 
ety in his taking contracts, or making money out of them, as that 
is mere matter of business. There is nothing wrong in this, unless 
some unfairness or dishonesty is shown, which supposition I have 
no doubt Gen. CAMERON will be able to disprove. I shall deal fairly 
with him, but I say to you, gentlemen, frankly, that if the charges 
against him are proven, he cannot have a seat in my Cabinet, as I 
will not have any man associated with me whose character is im- 
peached. I will say further, that if he vindicates himself, I have 
the strongest desire to place him in the position you wish him to 
fill, and which you think the interests of your State demand. If, 
after he has been appointed, I should be deceived by subsequent 
transactions of a disreputable character, the responsibility will rest 

[180] 



JANUARY 2 8 9 l86l 

upon you gentlemen of Pennsylvania ivho have so strongly pre- 
sented his claims to my consideration. But this is supposing a state 
of things which may never occur." 



York Times, February 7, 1861, copied from the Philadelphia Mercury. 
2 H. G. Smith, CX H. P. Parker, Peter Ford, and Charles Adams were the 
committee representing the Republican Club of Philadelphia. 

To R. A. Cameron, Walter March, 
and David C. Branham 1 

Springfield Jany 26th 1861. 
Messrs Cameron, Marsh & Branham Committee 

Gentlemen I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt, by 
your hands, of a copy of a Joint Resolution, adopted by the Legisla- 
ture of the State of Indiana, on the 5th. inst inviting me to visit 
that honorable body on my way to the Federal Capital. 

Expressing my profound graitude for this flattering testimonial 
of their regard and esteem, be pleased to bear to them my accept- 
ance of their kind invitation, and inform them that I will en- 
deavor to visit them, in accordance with their expressed desire, on 
the 12th of February next. 

With feelings of high consideration, I remain Your humble 
servant A Lirsrcousr 

1 Copy, DLC-RTL. The letter from the committee asldng to see Lincoln, dated 
at Springfield, January 22, bears the names "D. C. Branam" and "W. Marsh." 
Other sources give the spelling as Branham and March. 

To John Hanks 1 

Dear John Springfield, Jan. 2,8. 1861 

I now think I -will pass Decatur, going to Coles, on the day after 
to-morrow Wednesday, the 3Oth. of the month. Be ready, and go 
along. Yours as ever A. LINCOLN 

1 AL.S-F, ISLA. Lincoln spent January 31 "with his stepmother in Coles 
County. 

To James Sulgrove, Eric Locke, 'William Wallace, 

and John F. Wood 1 

Springfield 111. Jan. 28, 1861. 

Messrs. James Sulgrove, Eric Locke, William Wallace, and John 
F. Wood Committee 

Gentlemen: I received to-day from the hands of Mr. Locke, a 

T181 1 



JT A 3NT TJ A R T 29, l86l 

transcript of the Resolutions passed at a meeting of the citizens of 
Indianapolis, inviting me to visit that city on my route to Wash- 
ington. 

Permit me to express to the citizens of Indianapolis, through you, 
their committee, my cordial thanks for the honor shown me. I ac- 
cept with great pleasure the invitation so kindly tendered, and will 
be in your city on the 12th day of February next. Your obt. Servt. 

A. LINCOLN 

* LS copy, DLC-RTL. 

Endorsement: Thomas Reynolds to Lincoln 1 

[c. January 29, 1861] 
Answer this respectfully. 

1 AE, DLC-RTL. Reynolds' letter of January 29 invited Lincoln to use the 
Great Western Railway in Illinois on 3ns trip to Washington. 

Remarks at Charleston, Illinois 1 

January 31, 1861 

He held a public reception in the town hall at Charleston, at- 
tended by hundreds of people. Being called upon to make a speech, 
he stated that the time for a public definition of the policy of his 
administration had not come, and that he could but express his 
gratification at seeing so many of his friends and give them a 
hearty greeting. Most of those in attendance then shook hands with 
him and dispersed, amidst enthusiastic cheering. 
1 New York Herald, February 4, 1861. 

To Benjamin Eggleston, Charles L. Moore 
and A. McAlpin 1 

Springfield, 111., Feb, i, 1861. 
Messrs. Benj. Eggleston, Charles L. Moore and A. McAlpin: 

Gentlemen: Yours of to-day, communicating two resolutions 
one of a Citizens' Meeting, and the other [of] the City Council, 
both of the City of Cincinnati, and inviting me to make that city a 
[stopping] point on my way to Washington is received. With my 
grateful acknowledgments to the citizens, City Council and your- 
selves, gentlemen, I accept the kind invitation, with the under- 
standing, however, that all ceremonies which would occupy much 
time, must be dispensed with. Your obedient servant, 

A. 

1 New York Times, February 8, 1861. 

[182] 



To William H. Seward 1 

Private & confidential. 
Hon. W. H. Seward Springfield, Ills. Feb. . 1861 

My dear Sir On the 2ist. ult. Hon. W. Kellogg, a Republican 
M.C of this state whom you probably know, was here, in a good 
deal of anxiety, seeking to ascertain to what extent I would be 
consenting for our friends to go in the way of compromise on the 
now vexed question. While he was with me I received a despatch 
from Senator Trumbull, at Washington, alluding to the same 
question, and telling me to await letters. I thereupon told Mr. 
Kellogg that when I should receive these letters, posting me as to 
the state of affairs at Washington, I would write you, requesting 
you to let him see my letter. To my surprise when the letters men- 
tioned by Judge Trumbull came, they made no allusion to the 
"vexed question" This baffled me so much that I was near not 
writing you at all, in compliance with what I had said to Judge 
Kellogg. 

I say now, however, as I have all the while said, that on the 
territorial question that is, the question of extending slavery 
under the national auspices, I am inflexible. I am for no compro- 
mise which assists or permits the extension of the institution on 
soil owned by the nation. And any trick by which the nation is to 
acquire territory, and then allow some local authority to spread 
slavery over it, is as obnoxious as any other. 

I take it that to effect some such result as this, and to put us 
again on the high-road to a slave empire is the object of all these 
proposed compromises. I am against it. 

As to fugitive slaves, District of Columbia, slave trade among 
the slave states, and whatever springs of necessity from the fact 
that the institution is amongst us, I care but little, so that what is 
done be comely, and not altogether outrageous. Nor do I care much 
about New-Mexico, if further extension were hedged against. 
Yours very truly A. LINCOLN 

1ALS, NAuE. 

To Daniel Ullmann 1 

Hon. Daniel Ullmann: Springfield, 111., Feb. i, 1861. 

Dear Sir: Your kind letter of the 25th ult., and the express 
package containing the bronze medal'of Mr. Clay, both came safely 
to hand this morning. 

Permit me, in the first place, to return you my heartfelt thanks 
for your goodness in sending me this valuable present; and second- 

[183] 



FEBRUARY 2, l86l 

ly, to express the extreme gratification I feel in possessing so beau- 
tiful a memento of him whom, during my whole political life, I 
have loved and revered as a teacher and leader. Your ob't servant, 

A. 



l Chicago Tribune, February 14, 1861. Daniel Ullmann, a New York attorney 
who had been the Know-Nothing candidate for governor in 1854, wrote on Jan- 
uary 25, that he was sending a bronze medal of Henry Clay one of 150 which 
had been made some years before which he had reserved "... with the in- 
tention ... of presenting it to the citizen of the school of Henry Clay, who 
should first be elected to the Presidency of the United States. . . ." (DLC- 
RTL). 

To George D. Prentice 1 

Private 
Geo. D. Prentice, Esq Springfield, Ills. Feb. 2, 1861 

My dear Sir Yours of the sist. ult. requesting a copy of the in- 
augeral is received. I have the document already blocked out; but 
in the now rapidly shifting scenes, I shall have to hold it subject 
to revision up to near the time of delivery. So soon as it shall take 
what I can regard as it's final shape, I shall remember, if I can, to 
send you a copy. Yours very truly A. LINCOLN 

i ALS, CSmH. 

To Andrew G. Curtin 1 

Hon. Andrew G. Curtin Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir. Feb. 4. 1861 

Mr. S. Newton Pettis 2 handed me your letter introducing him, 
to-day. He tells me he thinks you suspect that an impression un- 
favorable to you, has somehow been made upon me. I beg you to 
be assured this is a mistake. When I have friends who disagree 
with each other, I am very slow to take sides in their quarrel. I 
expect, on my winding way to Washington, to make brief stops at 
Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, and Harrisburg; and I shall be glad to 
meet you at any or all those places; or in fact, at any other place. 
Yours very truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, IHi. 

2 Solomon Newton Pettis was an attorney at Meadville, Pennsylvania, wnom 
Lincoln appointed associate justice for Colorado Territory -in 1861. 

Endorsement: Geza Mihalotzy to Lincoln 1 

[c. FebrLiary 4, 1861] 
I cheerfully grant the request above made. A. LINCOLN 

1 AES, ICHi. Captain Geza IVIilialotzy of a newly organized company of 
militia in Chicago wrote on February 4 asking permission to **. . . entitle our- 
selves 'Lincoln Riflemen,* of Slavonic Origin." 



To Edwin D. Morgan 1 

Springfield IU Feby 4th 1861. 

Sir: Your letter of the soth ult. inviting me on behalf of the 
Legislature of New York to pass through that State on my route to 
Washington, and tendering me the hospitalities of her authorities 
and people, has been duly received. 

With feelings of deep gratitude to you and them, for this testi- 
monial of regard and esteem, I beg you to notify them that I ac- 
cept the invitation so kindly extended. Your obt. Servt. 

His Excellency E. D. Morgan A. LINCOLN 

Governor of New York 

ES. Please let ceremonies be only such as to take the least time 
possible. A. L. 

1 LS, N. The letter is in Nicolay's handwriting and probably was composed 
by him, but the postscript was added by Lincoln, Nicolay had written Morgan 
on Lincoln's mstruction, February i, 1861, that Lincoln had not replied to Mor- 
gan's invitation of January 19 only because he had thought the legislature 
might pass a resolution inviting him and wished to reply to both at the same 
time (DLC-RTL). 

To Thurlow Weed 1 

Private 
Thurlow Weed, Esq Springfield, Ills. Feb. 4, 1861 

My dear Sir. I have both your letter to myself, and that to Judge 
Davis, in relation to a certain gentleman in your state claiming to 
dispense patronage in my name, and also to be authorized to use 
my name to advance the chances of Mr. Greely for an election 
to the U.S. Senate. It is very strange that such things should be 
said by any one. The gentleman you mention, did speak to me of 
Mr. Greely, in connection with the Senatorial election, and I 
replied in terms of kindness towards Mr. Greely which I really 
feel, but always with an express protest that my name must not be 
used in the Senatorial election, in favor of, or against any one. Any 
other representation of me, is a misrepresentation. 

As to the matter of dispensing patronage, it perhaps will sur- 
prise you, to learn, that I have information that you claim to have 
my authority to arrange that matter in N.Y. I do not believe you 
have so claimed; but still so some men say. On that subject you 
know all I have said to you is "justice to all," and I beg you to be- 
lieve I have said nothing more particular to any one. I say this to 
re-assure you that I have not changed my purpose; in the hope 
however, that you will not use my name in the matter. Yours truly 

A. LINCOLN. 

T1851 



FEBRUARY 6, l86l 

i ALS, NRU-Weed Papers on deposit. Weed wrote both Lincoln and David 
Davis on January 28 that New York Tribune stockholder and state representa- 
tive from Westchester, Benjamin F. Camp, was representing that Lincoln fa- 
vored Greeley's election to the Senate, and that he (Camp) would, in the 
event of Greeley's election, have the disposal of New York patronage. Davis en- 
closed Weed's letter with one of his own, February 2, suggesting that it might 
be wise to telegraph or write Weed ". . . to set yourself right." (DLC-RTL). 

To Charles S. Olden 1 

Springfield 111 Feby 6th 1861. 

Sir: Your letter of the ist inst. inviting me, in compliance with 
the request of the Legislature of New Jersey, to visit your State 
Capital while on my journey to Washington, has been duly re- 
ceived. 

I accept the invitation, with much gratitude to you and them for 
the kindness and honor thus offered. Your obt. Servt. 

His Excellency Chas. S Olden A. LINCOLN 

Governor of New Jersey 

ES. Please arrange no ceremonies that will waste time. 

i Copy, DLC-RTL. 

To John A. Andrew and the Senate and House 
of Representatives of Massachusetts 1 

Springfield, nis. Feb. 7, 1861 

His Excellency, the Governor, the President of the Senate, and the 
Speaker of the House of Representatives, for the Commonwealth of 
Massachusetts 

Gentlemen Your kind letter of Feb. ist., with a copy of the 
resolution of the General Court, inviting me, in the name of the 
government and People of Massachusetts, to visit the State, and ac- 
cept its hospitality, previous to the time of the Presidential in- 
augeration, is gratefully received by the hand of Col. Horace Bin- 
ney Sargent; and, in answer, I am constrained to say want of time, 
denies me the pleasure of accepting the invitation so generously 
tendered. Your Obedient Servant A. LINCOLN. 

l ALS copy, DLC-RTL; LS, CSmH. The letter sent is copied in Nicolay's 
hand and signed by Lincoln. 

To William Dennison 1 

Springfield 111 Feb 7th 1861. 

Sir: Your letter of the 3st ult. inviting me, on behalf of the 
Legislature of Ohio, to visit Columbus, on my way to Washington, 
has been duly received. 

[186] 



FEBRUARY /, l86l 

With profound gratitude for the mark of respect and honor thus 
cordially tendered me by you and them, I accept the invitation. 
Your obt Servt. A LINCOLN 

His Excellency W. Dennison 

Governor of Ohio 
Please arrange no ceremonies which -will waste time. 

i Copy, DLC-RTL. 



To Norman B. Judd 1 

Hon. N. B. Judd Springfield, Ills. 

My dear Sir Feb. 7, 1861 

If it shall not incommode you, your company, on the whole, or 
any part of my journey to Washington, will be very agreeable to 
me. Yours as ever A. 

1 ALS, owned by Verne Miners, Chicago, Illinois. 



To John G. Lowe, Thomas A. Phillips, 
and W. H. GiUespie 1 

Springfield 111. Feby /th 1861, 

Gentlemen: Your note of to-day, inviting me while on my way 
to Washington, to pass through the town and accept the hospitali- 
ties of the citizens of Dayton, Ohio, is before me. 

A want of the necessary time makes it impossible for me to stop 
in your town. If it will not retard my arrival at or departure from 
the city of Columbus, I will endeavor to pass through and at least 
bow to the friends there; if, however it would in any wise delay 
me, they must not even expect this, but be content instead to re- 
ceive through you, my warmest thanks for the kindness and cor- 
diality with which they have tendered this invitation. Your obt 
Servt. A. LmcoLrT 

Messrs. J. G. Lowe, T A. Phillips & W H Gillespie 
committee. 

1 Copy, DLC-RTL. That Nicolay composed Lincoln's reply is indicated by 
Lincoln's autograph note on the verso of the letter of invitation from Lowe, 
Phillips, and Gillespie: "Mr. Nicolay will answer this that I will pass through 
Dayton, and bow to the friends there, if I can get to and from Columbus just 
as soon; otherwise not. Lincoln," John G. Lowe was an attorney; Thomas A. 
Phillips, a cotton manufacturer; and W. H. Gillespie, the mayor, of Dayton, 
Ohio. 

[187] 



To Darwin A. Finney and Others 1 

Hon. D. A. Finly & others Springfield, Ills. 

Committee. Feb. 8, 1861 

Gentlemen: Yours of the 4th., inviting me, on behalf of the Leg- 
islature of Pennsylvania, to visit Harrisburg on my way to the 
Federal Capital, is received; and, in answer, allow me to say, I 
gratefully accept the tendered honor. 

The time of arrival, and other details, are subject to future ar- 
rangement Your Obt. Servt. A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS copy, DLC-RTL. Darwin A. Finney, wnose name Lincoln misspelled, 
was state senator from Crawford County, Pennsylvania. 

To George B. Senter and Others 1 

Geo. B. Senter & others, Springfield, Ills. 

Committee Feb. 8, 1861 

Gentlemen Yours of the 6th. inviting me, in compliance with 
a resolution of the city council, of the City of Cleveland, Ohio, to 
visit that city on my contemplated journey to Washington, is duly 
to hand; and, in answer, I have the honor to accept the invitation. 
The time of arrival, and other details, are subject to future ar- 
rangement. Your Obt. Servt. A. LINCOLN 

* ALS copy, DLC-RTL; LS, OClWHi. George B. Senter was mayor of Cleve- 
land, Ohio. 

Receipt for Notes Left with Robert Irwin 
for Collection 1 

[February 9? 1861] 

Abraham Lincoln leaves with the under-signed for safe-keeping, 
and to receive interest, the f ollowing papers 

One note of A. J. Van Deren, J. M. Vanderen, Cyrus W. Van 
Deren, security, and Lewis Johnson, for one thousand dollars, bal- 
lance due, interest at ten per cent, paid up to March 18 1861. 

TIDO notes of N. W. Edwards, together amounting to fifteen 
hundred and eighty seven dollars and ninety cents, interest at ten 
per cent due from Jan 16. 1860. 

Tivo notes of Smith, Edwards & Co, for aggregate ballance of one 
thousand dollars, and interest at ten per cent from Jan. 16. 1861. 

One note of J. K. Lewis and Thomas Lewis, for one hundred and 
fifty dollars, interest at ten per cent due from April 22, 1860. 

One note, and mortgage of Isaac Lindsay, for six hundred dol- 
lars, interest at [te]n per cent, due from August 28. 1860. 

[188] 



FEBRUARY Q, l86l 

One note & mortgage, of William Cline, for Seven hundred and 
fifty dollars, interest at ten per cent from Nov. 22. 1859. 

One note & mortgage of J. Ruckel, for five hundred dollars, in- 
terest at ten per cent, due from Sep 28 1860. 

One note of John Cook, for seven hundred and fifty dollars, in- 
terest due, from April 1 7, 1 860. 

One Springfield City bond, for one thousand dollars reduced by 
two payments to $666.67. 

One Certificate of Six shares of Alton & Sangamon Railroad 
stock 

One certificate of Scholarship in Illinois State University. 

One note of N. B. Judd, for three thousand dollars, with interest 
at ten per cent from Sep i. 1859. 
Policy of Insurance 
Lease of house 
Notes on Haines, 2 ROB. 



1 AD, owned by Springfield Marine Bank, Springfield, Illinois. Only the sig- 
nature is not in Lincoln's hand. With the receipt is a certification by David 
Davis, administrator of Lincoln's estate, that all the notes were collected in the 
amount of $9,044.41, ". . . except the note on N" B. Judd, & the shares in the 
Alton & Sangamon B. R. . . ." The notes represented loans to residents of 
Sangamon County, with the exception of Norman B. Judd's of Chicago. Previ- 
ously unidentified are Archibald J., John M., and Cyrus W. Van Deren, broth- 
ers, and their brother-in-law, Lewis Johnson; Joseph EL. Lewis and William 
Cline, Sangamon County farmers; and Thomas Lewis, brother of Joseph, a 
Springfield banker. Smith, Edwards & Company was John T. Smith and Ninian 
W. Edwards (later Smith, Wickersham & Company), dry goods merchants. 

2 A. and Jonathan Haines of Pekin, Illinois, for legal fees. 

Receipt to Samuel H. Melvin 1 

S. H. Melvin. February 9, 1861 

Bot. of A. Lincoln. 

6 Chairs 2 oo 12 oo 

i Spring Mattress 26 oo 

i Wardrobe 20 oo 

i "Whatnot 10 oo 

Stand i 50 

9% yds Stair Carpet 50 4 75 

4 Comforters 2 oo 8 oo 

$82.25 

Reed payment 

Springfield A. LmcouNT 

Feby gth 1861 

1 DS, owned by E. E Melvin, Pasadena, California. Samuel H. Melvin was a 
wholesale and retail dealer in drugs and medical supplies in Springfield. 

[189] 



Farewell Address at Springfield, Illinois 1 

[A. Version] 

February 11, 1861 

My friends No one, not in my situation, can appreciate my 
feeling of sadness at this parting. To this place, and the kindness of 
these people, I owe every thing. Here I have lived a quarter of a 
century, and have passed from a young to an old man. Here my 
children have been born, and one is buried. I now 2 leave, not know- 
ing when, or whether ever, I may return, with a task before me 
greater than that which rested upon Washington. Without the as- 
sistance of that Divine Being, who ever attended him, I cannot suc- 
ceed. With that assistance I cannot fail. Trusting in Him, who can 
go with me, and remain with you and be every where for good, 3 let 
us confidently hope that all will yet be well. To His care commend- 
ing you, as I hope in your prayers you will commend me, I bid you 
an affectionate farewell 

[B. Version] 4 
My Friends: 

No one not in my position can appreciate the sadness I feel at 
this parting. To this people I owe all that I am. Here I have lived 
more than a quarter of a century; here my children were born, 
and here one of them lies buried. I know not how soon I shall see 
you again. A duty devolves upon me which is, perhaps, greater 
than that which has devolved upon any other man since the days 
of Washington. He never would have succeeded except for the aid 
of Divine Providence, upon which he at all times relied. I feel that 
I cannot succeed without the same Divine aid which sustained him, 
and on the same Almighty Being I place my reliance for support, 
and I hope you, my friends, will all pray that I may receive that 
Divine assistance without which I cannot succeed, but with which 
success is certain. Again I bid you an affectionate farewell. 

[G. Version] 5 
Friends, 

No one who has never been placed in a like position, can under- 
stand my feelings at this hour, nor the oppressive sadness I feel at 
this parting. For more than a quarter of a century I have lived 
among you, and during all that time I have received nothing but 
kindness at your hands. Here I have lived from my youth until 
now I am an old man. Here the most sacred ties of earth were as- 
sumed; here all my children were born; and here one of them lies 
buried. To you, dear friends, I owe all that I have, all that I am. 

[190] 



FEBRUARY 11, l86l 

All the strange, chequered past seems to crowd now upon my 
mind. To-day I leave you; I go to assume a task more difficult than 
that which devolved upon General Washington. Unless the great 
God who assisted him, shall be with and aid me, I must fail. But if 
the same omniscient mind, and Almighty arm that directed and 
protected him, shall guide and support me, I shall not fail, I shall 
succeed. Let us all pray that the God of our fathers may not for- 
sake us now. To him I commend you all ^permit me to ask that 
with equal security and faith, you all will invoke His wisdom and 
guidance for me. With these few- words I must leave you for how 
long I know not. Friends, one and all, I must now bid you an af- 
fectionate farewell. 

1 AD, DLC-RTL. Written down in pencil after tike event, as tne train was 
leaving Springfield, the manuscript begins in Lincoln's Handwriting and con- 
cludes in Nicolay's. Both Lincoln's and Nicolay's portions are, though cramped 
and irregular, very legibly and deliberately written. Henry Villard's story that 
he at one time had the pencilled manuscript and lost it, may or may not be true. 
His statement that John Hay took notes and that a stenographer was present, 
may also be true, but these documents have not been found. The other versions 
given below- may stem from these sources. For Villard's account see Lincoln on 
the Eve of *6i y A Journalist's Story, edited by Harold G. and Oswald Garrison 
Villard (1941) and Memoirs of Henry Villard (1904). 

2 Lincoln's handwriting ends and Nicolay's begins. 

3 The remainder of this sentence is in Lincoln's handwriting 

4 This version is from a broadside distributed in April, 1865, by The 
American News Company of New York (PHi; IHi), It is in all but a few 
marks of punctuation identical with that which appeared in Harper's Weekly 
and various eastern newspapers on February 12, 1861. 

5 Illinois State Journal, February 12, 1861. Some authorities, beginning with 
Herndon, regard this text as the most accurate one. If this version was taken 
down as Lincoln spoke, this may be so. Unfortunately, however, no verification 
of this possibility, earlier than Villard's, exists, and his account contains too 
many discrepancies to be accepted verbatim. 

Remarks at Tolono, Illinois 1 

February 11, 1861 

I am leaving you on an errand of national importance, attended, 
as you are aware, with considerable difficulties. Let us believe, as 
some poet has expressed it: 

Behind the cloud the sun is still shining. 
I bid you an affectionate f arewell. 
1 New York Tribune and New York Herald? February 12, 1861. 

Remarks at Danville-, Illinois 1 

February 11, 1861 

Mr. Lincoln again stepped out, and addressing himself to the 
enthusiastic gathering, remarked, that if he had any blessings to 

[191] 



FEBRUARY 11, l86l 

dispense, he would certainly dispense the largest and roundest to 
his good old friends o Vermillion county. 
* New York Herald., February 12, 1861. 

Remarks at Indiana State Line 1 

February 11, 1861 

Gentlemen of Indiana; I am happy to meet you on this occasion, 
and enter again the state of my early life, and almost of maturity. 
I am under many obligations to you for your kind reception, and 
to Indiana for the aid she rendered our cause which, I think, a just 
one. Gentlemen, I shall address you at greater length at Indian- 
apolis, but not much greater. Again gentlemen, I thank you for 
your warm hearted reception. 

1 The Courier, Lafayette, Indiana, February 12, 1861. 

Speech at Lafayette., Indiana 1 

February 11, 1861 

FELLOW CITIZENS: We have seen great changes within the 
recollection of some of us who are the older. When I first came to 
the west, some 44 or 45 years ago,- at sundown you had completed 
a journey of some 30 miles which you had commenced at sunrise, 
and thought you had done well. Now only six hours have elapsed 
since I left my home in Illinois where I was surrounded by a large 
concourse of my fellow citizens, almost all of whom I could recog- 
nize, and I find myself far from home surrounded by the thou- 
sands I now see before me, who are strangers to me. Still we are 
bound together, I trust in Christianity, civilization and patriotism, 
and are attached to our country and our whole country. TVliile 
some of us may differ in political opinions, still we are all united in 
one feeling for the Union. We all believe in the maintainance of 
the Union, of every star and every stripe of the glorious flag, and 
permit me to express the sentiment that upon the union of the 
States, there shall be between us no difference. My friends, I meet 
many friends at every place on my journey, and I should weary 
myself should I talk at length, therefore permit me to bid you an 
affectionate f arewell. 

1 The Courier, Lafayette, Indiana, February 12, 1861. 

Remarks at Thorntown and Lebanon., Indiana 1 

February 11, 1861 

At Thorntown he was betrayed into an anecdote to illustrate a 
point, and the train started before he got to the place where the 

[192] 



FEBRUARY 11, l86l 

laugh came in, and the people were left to wonder what the mean- 
ing might be. He was apologizing for not making a speech. He had 
heard of a man who was a candidate for a county office, who owned 
a horse that he set great store by, but he was a slow animal and 
sure footed. He had canvassed extensively -with a good chance for 
the nomination. On the morning of the day of the convention, he 
mounted his favorite to go to the county seat, but in spite of whip 
and spur, his horse lagged on the road, biting at every bush, and 
when he arrived late in the evening, the convention was over and 
he was defeated. So of him, if he stopped at every station to make 
a stump speech he would not arrive at Washington until the in- 
auguration was over. The Thorntown folks only heard the first 
part of the story, where the candidate was xirging his steed to pass 
the juicy bushes. He laughed over the cutting short of his yarn, and 
when the train arrived at Lebanon he was jocularly told that some 
of the Thorntown folks had followed the train on foot, and were 
panting outside to hear the conclusion of the story. He told it over 
good-humoredly to the crowd at Lebanon. Every station along the 
road had its crowd all anxious to see the man -whose election to 
the first office in the gift of a free people has been the cause 
(whether with reason or not) of the distracted state of the country. 

1 Indianapolis ID ally Sentinel, February 12, 1861. 

Reply to Oliver E Morton 
at Indianapolis., Indiana 1 

February 11, 1861 

Gov. Morton and Felloiv Citizens of the State of Indiana: 
Most heartily do I thank you for this magnificent reception, and 
while I cannot take to myself any share of the compliment thus 
paid, more than that which pertains to a mere instrument, an acci- 
dental instrument, perhaps I should say, of a great cause, I yet 
must look upon it as a most magnificent reception, and as such, 
most heartily do I thank you for it. 

You have been pleased to address yourselves to me chiefly 2 in be- 
half of this glorious Union in which we live, in all of which you 
have my hearty sympathy, and, as far as may be within my power, 
will have, one 3 and inseparably, my hearty consideration. While I 
do not expect, upon this occasion, or on any occasion, till after 4 I 
get to "Washington, to attempt any lengthy speech, I will only say 
that to the salvation of this Union there needs but one single thing 
the hearts of a people like yours. [Applause.] When the people 5 

[193] 



FEBRUARY 11, l86l 

rise in masses in behalf of the Union and the liberties of their 
country, truly may it be said, "The gates of hell shall not prevail 
against them." [Rene-wed applause.] 

In all the trying positions in which I shall be placed, and doubt- 
less I shall be placed in many trying ones, 6 my reliance will be 
placed upon you and the people of the United States and I wish 
you to remember now and forever, that it is your business, and not 
mine; that if the union of these States, and the liberties of this 
people, shall be lost, it is but little to any one man of fifty-two 
years of age, but a great deal to the thirty millions of people who 
inhabit these United States, and to their posterity in all coming 
time. It is your business to rise up and preserve the Union and 
liberty, for yourselves, and not for me. I desire they shall be con- 
stitutionally preserved. 

I, as already intimated, am but an accidental instrument, tem- 
porary, and to serve but for a limited time, but I appeal to you 
again to constantly 7 bear in mind that with you, and not with poli- 
ticians, not with Presidents, not with office-seekers, but with you, is 
the question, "Shall the Union and shall the liberties of this coun- 
try be preserved to the latest generation?" [Loud and prolonged ap- 
plause.] 

1 Indianapolis Journal and Cincinnati Daily Gazette., February 12; and Cin- 
cinnati Daily Commercial, February 13, 1861. These papers report the speech 
better than the Indianapolis Daily Sentinel, but no one of the three reports is 
wholly reliable. Our text is a collation of all three. Although we have chosen 
the most probable reading, in instances where the variant word or phrase may 
have some claim, it is given in a footnote. Lincoln spoke from the rear platform 
in reply to Governor Morton, who welcomed him from an open barouche drawn 
up beside the train. 2 Gazette has "cheerily.** 

3 Commercial has "now." 

4 Journal and Commercial have "or until" and omit the preceding "or on any 
occasion." 

5 Journal and Commercial have "The people, when they rise. . . ." 
G Journal and Commercial have "such" instead of "trying ones." 

7 Gazette has "continue to" instead of "constantly." 

Speech from the Balcony of the Bates House 
at Indianapolis, Indiana 1 

February 11, 1861 

It is not possible, in my journey to the national capital, to ad- 
dress assemblies like this which may do me the great honor to meet 
me as you have done, but very briefly. I should be entirely worn 
out if I were to attempt it. I appear before you now to thank you 
for this very magnificent welcome -which you have given me, and 
still more for the very generous support which your State recently 

[194] 



FEBRUARY 11, l86l 

gave to the political cause of the whole country, and the whole 
world. [Applause.] Solomon has said, that there is a time to keep 
silence. [Renewed and deafening applause.] * * * * * 2 We 
know certain that they mean the same thing while using the same 
words now, and it perhaps would be as well if they would keep 
silence. 

The words "coercion" and "invasion" are in great use about 
these days. Suppose we were simply to try i we can, and ascer- 
tain what, is the meaning of these words. Let us get, if we can, the 
exact definitions of these words not from dictionaries, but from 
the men who constantly repeat them what things they mean to 
express by the words. What, then, is "coercion"? What is "inva- 
sion"? Would the marching of an army into South Carolina, for 
instance, without the consent of her people, and in hostility against 
them, be coercion or invasion? I very frankly say, I think it would 
be invasion, and it would be coercion too, if the people of that 
country were forced to submit. But if the Government, for in- 
stance, but simply insists upon holding its own forts, or retaking 
those forts which belong to it, [cheers,] or the enforcement of 
the laws of the United States in the collection of duties upon for- 
eign importations, [renewed cheers,] or even the withdrawal of 
the mails from those portions of the country where the mails them- 
selves are habitually violated; would any or all of these things be 
coercion? Do the lovers of the Union contend that they will resist 
coercion or invasion of any State, understanding that any or all 
of these would be coercing or invading a State? If they do, then it 
occurs to me that the means for the preservation of the Union they 
so greatly love, in their own estimation, is of a very thin and airy 
character. [Applause.] If sick, they would consider the little pills 
of the homoepathist as already too large for them to swallow. In 
their view, the Union, as a family relation, would not be anything 
like a regular marriage at all, but only as a sort of free-love ar- 
rangement, [laughter,] to be maintained on what that sect calls 
passionate attraction, [Continued laughter.] But, my friends, 
enough of this. 

What is the particular sacredness of a State? I speak not of that 
position which is given to a State in and by the Constitution of the 
United States, for that all of us agree to we abide by; but that 
position assumed, that a State can carry with it out of the Union 
that which it holds in sacredness by virtue of its connection with 
the Union. I am speaking of that assumed right of a State, as a pri- 
mary principle, that the Constitution should rule all that is less 
than itself, and ruin all that is bigger than itself. [Laughter.] But, 

[195] 



FEBRUARY 11., l86l 

I ask, wherein does consist that right? If a State, in one instance, 
and a county in another, should be equal in extent of territory, and 
equal in the number of people, wherein is that State any better 
than the county? Can a change of name change the right? By what 
principle of original right is it that one-fiftieth or one-ninetieth of 
a great nation, by calling themselves a State, have the right to 
break up and ruin that nation as a matter of original principle? 
Now, I ask the question I am not deciding anything [laughter,] 
and -with the request that you will think somewhat upon that 
subject and decide for yourselves, if you choose, when you get 
ready, where is the mysterious, original right, from principle, for 
a certain district of country with inhabitants, by merely being 
called a State, to play tyrant over all its own citizens, and deny 
the authority of everything greater than itself. [Laughter.] I say I 
am deciding nothing, but simply giving something for you to re- 
flect upon; and, with having said this much, and having declared, 
in the start, that I will make no long speeches, I thank you again 
for this magnificent welcome, and bid you an affectionate farewell. 
[Cheers.] 

1 Indianapolis Daily Sentinel^ February 12, 1861. Although the text printed in 
the Indianapolis Journal^ February 12, Cmcinnati Daily Commercial and New 
York Tribune, February 13, purports to have been revised by Lincoln, it omits 
colorful sentences and even necessary phrases undoubtedly spoken by Lincoln. 
Space scarcely justifies inclusion of both versions, and on the ground that Lin- 
coln's revision, if made, must have been exceedingly hurried, the editors have 
chosen the Sentinel text as the better of the two. 

2 Asterisks are in the original. No other report supplies the omitted passage, 
which was apparently lost by the reporter in the cheering. 

Remarks from the Balcony at Bates House, 
Indianapolis, Indiana 1 

February 11, 1861 

Last night, previous to Mr. Lincoln's departure from the Bates 
House, he was again introduced from the balcony, by the Hon. Sol. 
Meredith. Mr. Lincoln said he had no speech to make. If he made 
speeches whenever his friends desired, he would not be able to 
reach the National Capital at the*appointed time. He once more 
thanked the assemblage for the reception, and trusted we all might 
meet again under one flag of one Union. He bade them affectionate 
farewell. 

1 New York Tribune, February 13, 1861. The next morning prior to his de- 
parture from the Bates House, Lincoln -was introduced again from the balcony 
and made practically the same remarks (Cincinnati Daily Commercial, Feb- 
ruary 13, 1861). 

[196] 



Remarks at Lawrenceburg, Indiana 1 

February 12, 1861 

My f enow-countrymen. You call upon me for a speech; I have 
none to give to you, and have not sufficient time to devote to it if I 
had. I suppose you are all Union men here, (cheers and cries of 
"Bight") and I suppose that you are in favor of doing full justice 
to all, whether on that side of the river (pointing to the Kentucky 
shore), or on your own, (Loud cheering and cries of "We are.") If 
the politicians and leaders of parties were as true as the PEOPLE, 
there would be little fear that the peace of the country would be 
disturbed. I have been selected to fill an important office for a brief 
period, and am now, in your eyes, invested with an influence 
which will soon pass away; but should my administration prove 
to be a very wicked one, or what is more probable, a very foolish 
one, if you, the PEOPLE, are but true to yourselves and to the Con- 
stitution, there is but little harm I can do, thank Godl 

1 Cincinnati Daily Commercial^ February 13, 1861. Of the several newspaper 
reports of this speech, this seems to be the only attempt at a complete verbatim 
report. 

Reply to Robert Hosea, Cincinnati., Ohio 1 

February 12, 1861 

Mr. CHAIRMAN: I thank you, citizens of Cincinnati, Ohio, and 
Kentucky, for this reception. As I understand it is a part of the 
programme that I will address you a little more at length at the 
Burnet House, I will, for the present, postpone the mating of any 
remarks. I will proceed at once from here. I remark here that it is 
not my purpose to make a lengthy speech. 

1 Cincinnati Daily Commercial, February 13, 1861. Robert Hosea, chairman 
of the reception committee, made a speech of welcome at the station where 
an immense throng had gathered. 

Speech at Cincinnati, Ohio 1 

February 12, 1861 

Mr. Mayor, ladies and gentlemen: Twenty-four hours ago, at 
the Capital of Indiana, I said to myself I have never seen so many 
people assembled together in winter weather. I am no longer able 
to say that. But it is what might reasonably have been expected 
that this great city of Cincinnati would thus acquit herself on such 
an occasion. My friends, I am entirely overwhelmed by the mag- 
nificence of the reception which has been given, I will not say to 

[197] 



FEBRUARY 12, l86l 

me, but to the President elect of the United States of America. 
[Loud cheering.] Most heartily do I thank you, one and all for 
it. [Applause.] 

I am reminded by the address of your worthy Mayor, that this 
reception is given not by any one political party, and even if I 
had not been so reminded by His Honor I could not have failed to 
know the fact by the extent of the multitude I see before me now. 
I could not look upon this vast assemblage without being made 
aware that all parties were united in this reception. [Applause.] 
This is as it should be. It is as it should have been if Senator Doug- 
las had been elected. It is as it should have been if Mr. Bell had 
been elected as it should have been if Mr. Breckinridge had been 
elected as it should ever be when any citizen of the United 
States is constitutionally elected President of the United States. 
(Great applause.) Allow me to say that I think what has occurred 
here to-day could not have occurred in any other country on the 
face of the globe, without the influence of the free institutions 
which we have unceasingly enjoyed for three-quarters of a cen- 
tury. (Applause.) There is no country where the people can turn 
out and enjoy this day precisely as they please, save under the 
benign influence of the free institutions of our land. [Applause.] 
I hope that, although we have some threatening National diffi- 
culties now I hope that while these free institutions shall con- 
tinue to be in the enjoyment of millions of free people of the 
United States, we will see repeated every four years what we now 
witness. [Applause.] 

In a few short years, I and every other individual man who is 
now living will pass away. I hope that our national difficulties will 
also pass away, and I hope we shall see in the streets of Cincinnati 
good old Cincinnati for centuries to come, once every four 
years her people give such a reception as this to the constitutionally 
elected President of the whole United States. [Applause.] I hope 
you shall all join in that reception, and that you shall also welcome 
your brethren far across the river to participate in it. "We will wel- 
come them in every State of the Union, no matter -where they are 
from. From away South we shall extend them a cordial good will 
when our present differences shall have been forgotten and blown 
to the winds forever. [Applause.] 

I 2 have spoken but once, before this, in Cincinnati. That was 
a year previous to the late Presidential election. On that occa- 
sion, in a playful manner, but with sincere words, I addressed 
much of what I said, to the Kentuckians. I gave my opinion that 
we, as Republicans, would ultimately beat them as democrats; but 

[198] 



FEBRUARY 12, l86l 

that they could postpone that result longer by nominating Senator 
Douglas for the Presidency than they could in any other way. 
They did not, in any true sense of the word, nominate Douglas, 
and the result has come certainly as soon as even I expected. I also 
told them how I expected they would be treated, after they should 
have been beaten; and I now wish to re-call their attention to what 
I then said upon that subject. I then said: "When we do, as we 
say, beat you, you perhaps want to know what we will do with 
you. I will tell you, so far as I am authorized to speak for the op- 
position, what we mean to do with you. We mean to treat you, as 
near as we possibly can, as Washington, Jefferson, and Madison 
treated you. We mean to leave you alone, and in no way to inter- 
fere with your institution; to abide by all and every compromise 
of the constitution, and, in a word, coming back to the original 
proposition, to treat you, so far as degenerated men (if we have de- 
generated) may, according to the examples of those noble fathers 
Washington, Jefferson and Madison. We mean to remember that 
you are as good as we; that there is no difference between us, other 
than the difference of circumstances. We mean to recognize, and 
bear in mind always, that you have as good hearts in your bosoms 
as other people, or as we claim to have, and treat you accordingly." 
Fellow citizens of Kentucky friends bretheren, may I call you 
in my new position, I see no occasion, and feel no inclination, to 
retract a word of this. [Applause,] If it shall not be made good, be 
assured, the fault shall not be mine. [Applause.] 

And now, fellow citizens of Ohio, have you, who agree with him 
who now addresses you, in political sentiment have you ever en- 
tertained other sentiments towards our brethren of Kentucky than 
those I have expressed to you. [Loud and continued cries of "No."] 
If not, then why shall we not, as heretofore, be recognized and ac- 
knowledged as brethren again, living in peace and harmony one 
with another? [Cries of "We will."] I take your response as the 
most reliable evidence that it may be so, along with other evidence, 
trusting that the good sense of the American people, on all sides of 
all rivers in America, under the Providence of God, who has never 
deserted us, that we shall again be brethren, forgetting all parties 
ignoring all parties. My friends I now bid you farewell. [Long 
continued applause.] 

1 Cincinnati Daily Gazette, February 13, 1861; AD, DLC-B.TL. The Cincin- 
nati Daily Commercial, February 13, reports the speech with considerable 
verbal variation from the Gazette, but -without substantial difference. Collation 
being impossible because of the wide differences and there being little to justify 
printing both texts, the editors have chosen the Gazette as the better because 
it adheres closely to the three extant manuscript pages of the speech, Lincoln 

C199] 



FEBRUARY 12, l86l 

spoke from the balcony of the Burnet House in reply to an introduction hy 
Mayor Richard M. Bishop. 

- This and the next paragraph follow the autograph manuscript. 

Fragment of Speech Intended for Kentuckians 1 

[c. February 12, 1861] 

I am grateful, for the oppertunlty your invitation affords me to 
appear before an audience of my native state. During the present 
winter it has been greatly pressed upon me by many patriotic citi- 
zens, Kentuckians among others, that I could in my position, by a 
word, restore peace to the country. But what word? I have many 
words already before the public; and my position was given me on 
the faith of those words. Is the desired word to be confirmatory of 
these; or must it be contradictory to them? If the former, it is use- 
less repe[ti]tion; if the latter, it is dishonorable and treacherous. 

Again, it is urged as if the word must be spoken before the 
fourth of March. Why? Is the speaking the word a "sine qua non" 
to the inaugeration? Is there a Bell-man, a Breckinridge-man, or a 
Douglas man, who would tolerate his own candidate to make such 
terms, had he been elected? Who amongst you would not die by 
the proposition, that your candidate, being elected, should be in- 
augerated, solely on the conditions of the constitution, and laws, 
or not at all. What Kentuckian, worthy of his birth place, would 
not do this? Gentlemen, I too, am a Kentuckian. 

Nor is this a matter of mere personal honor. 2 No man can be 
elected President without some opponents, as well as supporters; 
and if when elected, he can not be installed, till he first appeases 
his enemies, by breaking his pledges, and and [sic] betraying his 
friends, this government, and all popular government, is already 
at an end. Demands for such surrender, once recognized, and 
yielded to, are without limit, as to nature, extent, or repetition. 
They break the only bond of faith between public, and public 
servant; and they distinctly set the minority over the majority. 
Such demands acquiesced in, would not merely be the ruin of a 
man, or a party; but as a precedent they would ruin the govern- 
ment itself. 

I do not deny the possibility that the people may err in an elec- 
tion; but if they do, the true [remedy] is in the next election, and 
not in the treachery of the person elected. 

During 3 the winter just closed, I have been greatly urged, by 
many patriotic men, to lend the influence of my position to some 
compromise, by which I was, to some extent, to shift the ground 

[200] 



FEBRUARY 12, l86l 

upon which I had been elected. This I steadily refused. I so re- 
fused, not from any party wantonness, nor from any indifference 
to the troubles of the country. I thought such refusal was demanded 
by the view that if, when a Chief Magistrate is constitutionally 
elected, he cannot be inaugurated till he betrays those who elected 
him, by breaking his pledges, and surrendering to those who tried 
and failed to defeat him at the polls, this government and all popu- 
lar government is already at an end. Demands for such surrender, 
once recognized, are without limit, as to nature, extent and repe- 
tition. They break the only bond of faith between public and pub- 
lic servant; and they distinctly set the minority over the majority. 

I presume there is not a man in America, (and there ought not 
to be one) who opposed my election, who would, for a moment, 
tolerate his own candidate in such surrender, had he been success- 
ful in the election. In such case they would all see, that such sur- 
render would not be merely the ruin of a man, or a party; but, as a 
precedent, would be the ruin of the government itself. 

I do not deny the possibility that the people may err in an elec- 
tion; but if they do, the true cure is in the next election; and not 
in the treachery of the party elected. 

1 AD, DLC-RTL. The five small pages of this manuscript and the three 
pages of manuscript of the Cincinnati speech (supra) in which Lincoln speaks 
to the Kentuckians, are written on the same lined note paper. On the back of 
the fifth page is pasted a clipping from the first edition of the First Inaugural 
Address (vide infra, p. 259, n. 77) which was printed in Springfield before Lin- 
coln's departure for Washington. This indicates that Lincoln prepared the frag- 
ment prior to February 12, and that he contemplated a brief visit to his native 
state -while at Cincinnati, the nearest point in his itinerary. 

2 Lincoln revised this sentence to the form given. As first written it read: "If 
when a Chief Magistrate is constitutionally elected, he can not be installed, 
till he betrays those who elected Trim., by breaking his pledges, and surrendering 
to his opponents, this government, and all popular government, is already at 
an end." 

3 The remainder of the fragment is a clipping from the First Inaugural as 
printed in Springfield, pasted on the back of the last page. 

Speech to Germans at Cincinnati., Ohio 1 

February 12, 1861 
[Commercial Version] 

MR. CHAIRMAN: I thank you and those whom you represent, for 
the compliment you have paid me, by tendering me this address. 
In so far as there is an allusion to our present national difficulties, 
which expresses, as you have said, the views of the gentlemen 
present, I shall have to beg pardon for not entering fully upon 
the questions, which the address you have now read, suggests. 

[201] 



FEBRUARY 12, l86l 

I deem it my duty a duty which I owe to my constituents to 
you, gentlemen, that I should wait until the last moment, for a 
development of the present national difficulties, before I express 
myself decidedly what course I shall pursue. I hope, then, not to 
be false to anything that you have to expect of me. 

I agree with you, Mr. Chairman, that the working men are the 
basis of all governments, for the plain reason that they are the 
most numerous, and as you added that those were the sentiments 
of the gentlemen present, representing not only the working class, 
but citizens of other callings than those of the mechanic, I am 
happy to concur with you in these sentiments, not only of the 
native born citizens, but also of the Germans and foreigners from 
other countries. 

Mr. Chairman, I hold that while man exists, it is his duty to 
improve not only his own condition, but to assist in ameliorating 
mankind; and therefore, without entering upon the details of the 
question, I will simply say, that I am for those means which 
will give the greatest good to the greatest number. 

In regard to the Homestead Law, I have to say that in so far 
as the Government lands can be disposed of, I am in favor of cut- 
ting up the wild lands into parcels, so that every poor man may 
have a home. 

In regard to the Germans and foreigners, I esteem them no bet- 
ter than other people, nor any worse. [Cries of good.] It is not my 
nature, when I see a people borne down by the weight of their 
shackles the oppression of tyranny to make their life more bit- 
ter by heaping upon them greater burdens; but rather would I 
do all in my power to raise the yoke, than to add anything that 
would tend to crush them. 

Inasmuch as our country is extensive and new, and the countries 
of Europe are densely populated, if there are any abroad who de- 
sire to make this the land of their adoption, it is not in my heart 
to throw aught in their way, to prevent them from coming to the 
United States. 

Mr. Chairman, and Gentlemen, I will bid you an affectionate 
farewell. 

\Gazette Version] 

Mr. Chairman: I thank you and those you represent, for the 
compliment paid me by the tender of this address. In so far as 
there is an allusion to our present national difficulties, and the sug- 
gestion of the views of the gentlemen who present this address, I 
beg you will excuse me from entering particularly upon it. I deem 
it due to myself and the whole country, in the present extraordi- 

[202] 



FEBRUARY 13, l86l 

nary condition of the country and o public opinion, that I should 
wait and see the last development of public opinion before I give 
my views or express myself at the time of the inauguration. 
[Cheers.] I hope at that time to be false to nothing you have been 
taught to expect of me. [Cheers.] 

I agree with you, Mr. Chairman, and -with the address of your 
constituents, in the declaration that working men are the basis of 
all governments. That remark is due to them more than to any 
other class, for the reason that there are more of them than of 
any other class. And as your address is presented to me not only 
on behalf of workingmen, but especially of Germans, I may say 
a word as to classes. I hold the value of life is to improve one's 
condition. "Whatever is calculated to advance the condition of the 
honest, struggling laboring man, so far as my judgment will en- 
able me to judge of a correct thing, I am for that thing. 

An allusion has been made to the Homestead Law. I think it 
worthy of consideration, and that the wild lands of the country- 
should be distributed so that every man should have the means 
and opportunity of benefitting his condition. [Cheers.] I have 
said I do not desire to enter into details, nor will I. 

In regard to Germans and foreigners, I esteem foreigners no 
better than other people, nor any worse, [Laughter and cheers.] 
They are all of the great family of men, and if there is one shackle 
upon any of them, it would be far better to lift the load from them 
than to pile additional loads upon them. [Cheers.] And inasmuch 
as the continent of America is comparatively a new country, and 
the other countries of the world are old countries, there is more 
room here, comparatively speaking, than there is there; and if 
they can better their condition by leaving their old homes, there is 
nothing in my heart to forbid them coming; and I bid them all 
God speed. [Cheers.] 

Again, gentlemen, thanking you for your address, I bid you 
good night. 

1 Cincinnati Daily Commercial and Daily Gazette, February 13, 1861. Since 
the two versions vary considerably, Loth are reproduced. Brackets in the text 
are from the sources. Lincoln spoke in reply to a speech by Frederick Oberkline 
(the Gazette gives "Oberkleine"), chairman of a committee representing eight- 
een German industrial associations that called in a body to pay their respects. 

Remarks at London., Ohio 1 

February 13, 1861 

Fellow citizens, I do not appear before you to make a speech, and 
have not strength nor time to do so. If I were to undertake to make 

[203] 



FEBRUARY 13, 1 8 6 1 

a speech at every station, I should be completely tuckered out 
(not Mr. L's term, but its equivalent) before I reached the capital. 
I perceive a band of music present, and while the iron horse 
stops to water himself, I would prefer they should discourse in 
their more eloquent music than I am capable of. 

* London, Ohio, National Democrat., February 14, 1861. Although Lincoln 
made similar short speeches at other stops between Cincinnati and Columbus, 
Ohio, this is the only text which has been located in a contemporary newspaper. 



Address to the Ohio Legislature, 
Columbus, Ohio 1 

February 13, 1861 

MR. PRESIDENT AISTD MR. SPEAKER AISTD GENTLEIVCEIN" OF TBCE GEN- 
ERAL ASSEMBLY- It is true, as has been said by the President of 
the Senate, that very great responsibility rests upon me in the po- 
sition to which the votes of the American people have called me. 
I am deeply sensible of that weighty responsibility. I cannot but 
know what you all know, that, without a name, perhaps without a 
reason why I should have a name, there has fallen upon me a task 
such as did not rest even upon the Father of his country, and so 
feeling I cannot but turn and look for the support without which 
it will be impossible for me to perform that great task. I turn, then, 
and look to the American people and to that God who has never 
forsaken them. Allusion has been made to the interest felt in re- 
lation to the policy of the new administration. In this I have re- 
ceived from some a degree of credit for having kept silence, and 
from others some deprecation. I still think that I was right. In the 
varying and repeatedly shifting scenes of the present, and with- 
out a precedent which could enable me to judge by the past, it has 
seemed fitting that before speaking upon the difficulties of the 
country, I should have gained a view of the whole field, to be sure, 
after all, being at liberty to modify and change the course of pol- 
icy, as future events may make a change necessary. I have not 
maintained silence from any want of real anxiety. It is a good 
thing that there is no more than anxiety, for there is nothing go- 
ing wrong. It is a consoling circumstance that when we look out 
there is nothing that really hurts anybody. We entertain different 
views upon political questions, but nobody is suffering anything. 
This is a most consoling circumstance, and from it we may con- 
clude that all we want is time, patience and a reliance on that God 
who has never forsaken this people. Fellow citizens, what I have 

[204] 



FEBRUARY 13, l86l 

said, I have said altogether extemporaneously, and I will now 
come to a close. 

i New York Herald., February 14, 1861. Other papers reported this speech 
without substantial variation from this text. Lincoln was introduced by Lieu- 
tenant Governor Robert C. Kirk. 

Speech from the Steps of the Capitol 
at Columbus, Ohio 1 

February 13, 1861 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN: I appear before you only to address 
you briefly. I shall do little else than to thank you for this very- 
kind reception, to greet you and bid you farewell. I should not find 
strength, if I were otherwise inclined, to repeat speeches of very 
great length, upon every occasion similar to this although few 
so large which will occur on my way to the Federal Capitol. The 
General Assembly of the great State of Ohio has just done me the 
honor to receive me, and to hear a f ew broken remarks from my- 
self. Judging from what I see, I infer that that reception was one 
without party distinction, and one of entire kindness one that 
had nothing in it beyond a feeling of the citizenship of the United 
States of America. Knowing, as I do, that any crowd, drawn to- 
gether as this has been, is made up of the citizens near about, and 
that in this county of Franklin there is great difference of political 
sentiment, and those agreeing with me having a little the shortest 
row, (laughter,) from this, and the circumstances I have men- 
tioned, I infer that you do me the honor to meet me here without 
distinction of party, I think this is as it should be. Many of you 
who were not favorable to the election of myself to the Presidency 
were favorable to the election of the distinguished Senator from 
the State in. which I reside. If Senator Douglas had been elected 
to the Presidency in the late contest, I think my friends would 
have joined heartily in meeting and greeting him on his passage 
through your Capital, as you have me to-day. If any of the other 
candidates had been elected, I think it would have been altogether 
becoming and proper for all to have joined in showing honor, 
quite as well to the office, and the country, as to the man. The 
people are themselves honored by such a concentration. I am 
doubly thankful that you have appeared here to give me this greet- 
ing. It is not much to me, for I shall very soon pass away from 
you; but we have a large country and a large future before us, 
and the manifestations of good-will towards the government, and 
affection for the Union which you may exhibit are of immense 

[205] 



FEBRUARY 14, l86l 

value to you and your posterity forever. (Applause.) In this point 
of view it is that I thank you most heartily for the exhibition you 
have given me, and with this allow me to bid you an affectionate 
farewell. (Deafening applause and cheers.) 

1 The Crisis (Columbus), February 21, 1861. Lincoln addressed the crowd in 
front of the Capitol following his appearance before the legislature. 

Remarks at Newark, Ohio 1 

February 14, 1861 

I understand that arrangements were made for something of 
a speech from me here, when the train moved down, but it has 
gone so far that it has deprived me of addressing the many fair 
ladies assembled, while it has deprived them of observing my very 
interesting countenance. It is impossible for me to make you a 
speech: there is not time, so I bid you farewell. 
1 Newark North American., February 14, 1861. 

Remarks at Cadiz Junction, Ohio 1 

February 14, 1861 

After the tumult had subsided he spoke a few words to the 
people, thanking them for their kind reception, and stated that 
there were a great many stopping places between his home and 
Washington, and if he stopped at every one he would not get to 
Washington until after the Inauguration and that would not suit 
him. He had but time to thank them heartily for this kind and 
cordial farewell, when he was ushered into the dining room of 
the Parks House .... 

. . . .After dinner, Mr. Lincoln appeared on the platform of 
the car, and told the people that he could not make a speech, "as 
he was too full for utterance," but if they had time they would 
organize the train, and pass a vote of thanks to the people of 
Harrison County for the excellent dinner they had received, and 
especially to the lady of the house. 

1 Cadiz Republican, February 20, 1861; Cadiz Sentinel, February 20, 1861. 

Speech at Steubenville, Ohio 1 

February 14, 1861 

Mr. Chairman and Fellow-Citizens: The subject of the short 
address which has been made to me, though not an unfamiliar 
one, involves so many points, that in the short time allotted to 

[206] 



FEBRUARY 4., l86l 

me, I shall not be able to make a full and proper response. Though 
the people have made me by electing me, the instrument to carry 
out the wishes expressed in the address, I greatly fear that I shall 
not be the repository of the ability to do so. Indeed I know I shall 
not, more than in purpose, unless sustained by the great body of 
the people, and by the Divine Power, without whose aid we can 
do nothing. We everywhere express devotion to the Constitution. I 
believe there is no difference in this respect, whether on this or 
on the other side of this majestic stream. I understand that on the 
other side, among our dissatisfied brethren., they are satisfied with 
the Constitution of the United States, if they can have their rights 
under the Constitution. The question is, as to what the Constitu- 
tion means "What are their rights under the Constitution?" That 
is all. To decide that, who shall be the judge? Can you think of 
any other, than the voice of the people? If the majority does not 
control, the minority must would that be right? Would that be 
just or generous? Assuredly not! Though the majority may be 
wrong, and I will not undertake to say that they were not wrong 
in electing me, yet we must adhere to the principle that the ma- 
jority shall rule. By your Constitution you have another chance 
in four years. No great harm can be done by us in that time in 
that time there can be nobody hurt. If anything goes wrong, how- 
ever, and you find you have made a mistake, elect a better man 
next time. There are plenty of them. 

(Here the Engine whistled.) These points involve the discussion 
of many questions which I have not time to consider. I merely 
give them to you for your reflection. I almost regret that I alluded 
to it at all. 

Ladies, gentlemen and friends, I thank you for this kind and 
overv^helming reception, and bid you farewell. 
1 The American Union (Steubenville), February 20, 1861. 

Remarks at Wellsville, Ohio 1 

February 14, 1861 

Mr. Lincoln came out on the bind platform of the rear car and, 
after the cheering had ceased, said that he made his appearance 
merely to pass a word of greeting, and then to bid f arewell, as he 
said he had been informed that the train would halt just a minute 
and a half, consequently he would not be able to make a speech 
even if he were prepared to do so; that if he should make a speech 
at every station stopped at, he would not be able to reach Wash- 
ington until after the 4th of March. Here some old, drunken chap 

[207] 



FEBRUARY 14, l86l 

rushed up with his paw extended, and asked if he would shake 
hands with him, saying at the same time, that he had not voted 
for him but for Douglas a sad representative by the way of 
Douglas Democracy. Mr. Lincoln shook hands with him and said 
if he and the other friends of Mr. Douglas would assist in keep- 
ing the ship of state afloat, that perhaps Mr. Douglas might be 
selected to pilot it sometime in the future, but if it were allowed 
to go to pieces now, Mr, Douglas would, of course, stand no chance 
hereafter. He said he would do what he could to preserve the 
Union and if the people would do the same, the thing would be 
accomplished. 

1 New Lisbon, Ohio, The Buckeye State, February 21, 1861. 

Remarks at Rochester, Pennsylvania 1 

February 14, 1861 

He remarked that he had no speech to make, as it was impos- 
sible to speak at every point where his fellow citizens greeted Mm, 
and thanked them for this expression of their wishes toward him. 
He was now on his way to ^Washington, and about the 4th of 
March he would speak to all who chose to hear him. A voice in 
the crowd enquired "What will you do with the secessionists 
then?" Turning toward the direction of the voice, Mr. Lincoln re- 
plied, "My friend, that is a matter which I have under very grave 
consideration. " 

1 Beaver, Pennsylvania, Argus, February 20, 1861. 

Remarks at the Monongahela House., 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 1 

February 14, 1861 

Welloiv Citizens: We had an accident upon the road to-day, and 
were delayed till this late hour. I am sorry for this, inasmuch as 
it was my desire and intention to address the citizens of Pennsyl- 
vania, briefly, this evening, on what is properly styled their pe- 
culiar interest. And I still hope that some arrangement may be 
made to-morrow morning which will afford me the pleasure of 
talking to a larger number of my friends than can assemble in 
this hall. ["Go on now; there's enough here.'*] I have a great re- 
gard for Allegheny county. It is "the banner county of the Un- 
ion," [cheers,] and rolled xip an immense majority for what I, at 
least, consider a good cause. By a mere accident, and not through 

[208] 



FEBRUARY 14, l86l 

any merit of mine, it happened that I was the representative o 
that cause, and I acknowledge with all sincerity the high honor 
you have conferred on me. ["Three cheers for Honest Abe/ 7 and a 
voice saying, "It was no accident that elected you, but your own 
merits, and the worth of the cause."] I thank you, my fellow citi- 
zen, for your kind remark, and trust that I feel a becoming sense 
of the responsibility resting upon me. ["We know you do."] 

I could not help thinking, my friends, as I traveled in the rain 
through your crowded streets, on my way here, that if all that 
people were in favor of the Union, it can certainly be in no great 
danger it will be preserved. [A voice "We are all Union men." 
Another voice "That's so." A third voice "No compromise." A 
fourth "Three cheers for the Union."] But I am talking too long, 
longer than I ought. ["Oh, no! go on; split another rail." Laugh- 
ter.] You know that it has not been my custom, since I started on 
the route to Washington, to make long speeches; I am rather in- 
clined to silence, ["That's right"] and whether that be wise or 
not, it is at least more unusual now-a-days to find a man who can 
hold his tongue than to find one who cannot. [Laughter, and a 
voice "No railery Abe."] I thank you, sincerely, for the warm 
reception I have received, and in the morning, if an arrangement 
can be made, of which I am not yet certain, I may have some- 
thing to say to you of that "peculiar interest of Pennsylvania" be- 
fore mentioned. ["Say it now, we are all attention."] V^ell, my 
friends, as it is not much I have to say, and as there may be some 
uncertainty of another opportunity, I will utter it now, if you 
will permit me to procure a few notes that are in my overcoat 
pocket. ["Certainly we will," and cheers.] 2 

1 Pittsburgh Dispatch, February 15, 1861. Lincoln spoke standing on a chair 
to the crowd assembled in the lobby. 

2 According to the Dispatch, Lincoln retired to get his notes and later ap- 
peared on the balcony outside the hotel to make the brief remarks (infra) an- 
nouncing postponement of the speech until the next morning. 



Remarks from Balcony of the Monongahela 
House, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 1 

February 14, 1861 

Fellow-citizens, I have been prevailed upon by your committee 
to postpone my intended remarks to you until to-morrow, when 
we hope for more favorable weather, and I have made my appear- 
ance now only to afford you an opportunity of seeing, as clearly 
as may be, my beautiful countenance! [Loud laughter, and 

[209] 



FEBRUARY 1 5 9 l86l 

cheers.] In the morning at half -past eight o'clock I purpose 
speaking to you from this place. Until then, I bid you all good 
night. 

* Pittsburgh Dispatch, February 15, 1861. 

Speech at Pittsburgh-, Pennsylvania 1 

February 15, 1861 

Mayor Wilson and Citizens of Pennsylvania: I most cordially 
thank his Honor Mayor Wilson, and the citizens of Pittsburg gen- 
erally for this flattering reception. It is 2 the more grateful, because 
I know that, while it is not given to me alone, but to the cause 
which I represent, yet it is given under circumstances which clear- 
ly prove to me that there is good will and sincere feeling at the 
bottom of it. 

And here, fellow citizens, I may remark that in every short 
address I have made to the people, and in every crowd through 
which I have passed of late, some allusion has been made to the 
present distracted condition of the country. It is naturally expect- 
ed that I should say something upon this subject, but to touch upon 
it at all would involve an elaborate discussion of a great many 
questions and circumstances, would require more time than I can 
at present command, and 'would perhaps unnecessarily commit me 
upon matters which have not yet fully developed themselves. 
[Immense cheering, and cries of "good!" "that's right!"] 

The condition of the country, f ellow-citizens, is an extraordinary 
one, and fills the mind of every patriot with anxiety and solicitude. 
My intention is to give this subject all the consideration which I 
possibly can before I speak fully and definitely in regard to it 
so that, when I do speak, I may be as nearly right as possible. And 
when I do speak, fellow-citizens, I hope to say nothing in opposi- 
tion to the spirit of the Constitution, contrary to the integrity of 
the Union, or which will in any way prove inimical to the liber- 
ties of the people or to the peace of the whole country. And, fur- 

1 Pittsburgh Dispatch, February 16, 1861. Tlie Dispatch version lias been se- 
lected in preference to that of the New York Tribune of the same date because 
it more closely parallels the incomplete manuscript in that portion of the speech 
and because it sounds more like Lincoln throughout. In some instances, how- 
ever, where the Dispatch reporter seems to have missed a phrase, the Tribune 
variant is given in a footnote. The New York Herald, February 16, gives the 
same version as the Tribune and follows it -with a shorter version taken from 
Lincoln's manuscript. The manuscript, preserved in the Lincoln Papers, is here 
printed following the Dispatch version. All brackets are in the source. Lincoln 
was introduced by Mayor George Wilson. 

2 Tribune reads "I am," probably correctly. 

[210] 



FEBRUARY 5, l86l 

thermore, when the time arrives for me to speak on this great 
subject, I hope to say nothing which will disappoint the reasonable 
expectations o any man, or disappoint the people generally 
throughout the country, especially if their expectations have been 
based upon anything which I may have heretofore said. 

Notwithstanding the troubles across the river, [the speaker 
pointing southwardly, and smiling] there is really no crisis, spring- 
ing from anything in the government itself. In plain words, there 
is really no crisis except an artificial one\ What is there now to 
warrant the condition of affairs presented by our friends "over 
the river?" Take even their own view of the questions involved, 
and there is nothing to justify the course which they are pursuing. 
I repeat it, then there is no crisis., excepting such a one as may 
be gotten up at any time by designing politicians. 3 My advice, 
then, under such circumstances, is to keep cool. If the great Amer- 
ican people will only keep their temper, on both sides of the line, 
the troubles will come to an end, and the question which now dis- 
tracts the country will be settled just as surely as all other difficul- 
ties of like character which have originated in this government 
have been adjusted. Let the people on both sides keep their self-pos- 
session, and just as other clouds have cleared away in due time, 
so will this, and this great nation shall continue to prosper as here- 
tofore. But, fellow citizens, I have spoken longer on this subject 
than I had intended in the outset and I shall say no more at 
present. 

Fellow citizens, as this is the first opportunity 4 which I have had 
to address a Pennsylvania assemblage, it seems a fitting time to 
indulge in a few remarks upon the important question of a tariff 
a subject of great magnitude, and one which is attended with many 
difficulties, owing to the great variety of interests which it in- 
volves. So long as direct taxation for the support of government is 
not resorted to, a tariff is necessary. The tariff is to the government 
what a meal is to the family; but, while this is admitted, it still 
becomes necessary to modify and change its operations according to 
new interests and new circumstances. So far there is little differ- 
ence of opinion among politicians, but the question as to how far 
imposts may be adjusted for the protection of home industry, gives 
rise to various views and objections. I must confess that I do not 
understand this subject in all its multiform bearings, but I promise 
you that I will give it my closest attention, and endeavor to com- 
prehend it more fully. And here I may remark that the Chicago 

3 Tribune reads "by turbulent men, aided by designing politicians." 

4 Compare the remainder of the speeck with, the prepared manuscript, infra. 

[211] 



FEBRUARY 15, l86l 

platform contains a plank upon this subject, which I think should 
be regarded as law for the incoming administration. In fact, this 
question, as well as all other subjects embodied in that platform, 
should not be varied from what we gave the people to understand 
would be our policy when we obtained their votes. Permit me., 
fellow citizens, to read the tariff plank of the Chicago platform, 
or rather, to have it read in your hearing by one who has younger 
eyes than I have. 

Mr. Lincoln's private Secretary then read section twelfth of the 
Chicago platform, as follows: 

That, while providing revenue for the support of the General Gov- 
ernment by duties upon imposts, sound policy requires such an adjust- 
ment of the imposts as to encourage the development of the industrial 
interest of the whole country, and we commend that policy of national 
exchanges which secures to the working men liberal wages, to agricul- 
ture remunerating prices, to mechanics and manufacturers an adequate 
reward for their skill, labor and enterprise, and to the nation commer- 
cial prosperity and independence. 

Mr. Lincoln continued Now, fellow-citizens, I must confess 
that there are shades of difference in construing even this plank 
of the platform. But I am not now intending to discuss these differ- 
ences, but merely to give you some general ideas upon this subject. 
I have long thought that if there be any article of necessity which 
can be produced at home with as little or nearly the same labor as 
abroad, it would be better to protect that article. Labor is the true 
standard of value. If a bar of iron, got out of the mines of England, 
and a bar of iron taken from the mines of Pennsylvania, be pro- 
duced at the same cost, it f ollows that if the English bar be shipped 
from Manchester to Pittsburg, and the American bar from Pitts- 
burg to Manchester, the cost of carriage is appreciably lost. 
[Laughter.] If we had no iron here, then we should encourage its 
shipment from foreign countries; but not when we can make it as 
cheaply in our own country. This brings us back to our first pro- 
position, that if any article can be produced at home with nearly 
the same cost as abroad, the carriage is lost labor. 

The treasury of the nation is in such a low condition at present 
that this subject now demands the attention of Congress, and will 
demand the immediate consideration of the new Administration. 
The tariff bill now before Congress may or may not pass at the 
present session. I confess I do not understand the precise provisions 
of this bill, and I do not know whether it can be passed by the 
present Congress or not. It may or may not become the law of the 
land but if it does, that will be an end of the matter until a modi- 

[212] 



FEBRUARY 5, l86l 

fication can be effected, should it be deemed necessary. If it does 
not pass (and the latest advices I have are to the effect that it is 
still pending) the next Congress "will have to give it their earliest 
attention. 

According to my political education, I am inclined to believe 
that the people in the various sections of the country should have 
their own views carried out through their representatives in Con- 
gress, and if the consideration of the Tariff bill should be postponed 
until the next session of the National Legislature, no subject should 
engage your representatives more closely than that of a tariff. And 
if I have any recommendation to make, it will be that every man 
who is called upon to serve the people in a representative capacity, 
should study this whole subject thoroughly, as I intend to do my- 
self, looting to all the varied interests of our common country, so 
that when the time for action arrives adequate protection can be 
extended to the coal and iron of Pennsylvania, the corn of Illinois, 
and the "reapers of Chicago." Permit me to express the hope that 
this important subject may receive such consideration at the hands 
of your representatives, that the interests of no part of the country 
may be overlooked, but that all sections may share in common the 
benefits of a just and equitable tariff. [Applause.] 

But I am trespassing upon your patience [cries of "no!" "no!" 
"Go on we'll listen!"] and must bring my remarks to a close. 
Thanking you most cordially for the kind reception which you 
have extended me, I bid you all adieu. [Enthusiastic applause.] 

[Manuscript Prepared for the Pittsburgh Speech] 5 
For the first time I now have the honor to appear before a Penn- 
sylvania audience. 6 

It is often said that the tariff is the specialty of Pennsylvania. 
Assuming that direct taxation is not to be adopted, the tariff ques- 
tion must be as durable as the government itself. It is a question of 
national house-keeping. It is to the government what replenishing 
the meal-tub is to the family. Ever- varying circumstances will re- 
quire frequent modifications, as to amounts needed, and sources 
of supply. So far there is little difference of opinion among the 
people. It is as to whether, and how far, duties on imports, shall be 
adjusted to favor home production in the home market, that con- 
troversy begins. One party insists that such adjustment oppresses 
one class for the advantage of another; while the other party ar- 

5 AD, DLC-RTL. 

6 This sentence has been crossed out, but the Dispatch version corroborates 
its inclusion. 

[213] 



FEBRUARY 15, l86l 

gues that with all its incidents, and in the long run, all classes are 
benefitted. In the Chicago Platform there is a plank upon this sub- 
ject, which should be a general law, to the incoming administra- 
tion. We should do neither more nor less than we gave the people 
reason to believe we would, when they gave us their votes. That 
plank is as I now read. 

[The i2th plank of the Chicago platform was here read.] 7 
As with all general propositions, doubtless there will be shades 
of difference in construing this. I have, by no means, a thoroughly 
matured judgment upon this subject especially as to details 
Some general ideas are about all. I have long thought that to pro- 
duce any necessary article at home, which can be made of as good 
quality, and with as little labor at home as abroad, would better be 
made at home, at least by the difference of the carrying from 
abroad. In such case, the carrying is demonstrably a dead loss of 
labor. For instance, labor being the true standard of value, is it 
not plain, that if equal labor get a bar of rail-road iron out of a 
mine in England, and another out of a mine in Pennsylvania, each 
can be laid down in a track at home, cheaper than they could ex- 
change countries, at least by the cost of carriage. If there be a pres- 
ent cause why one can be both made and carried, cheaper, in 
money price., than the other can be made without carrying, that 
cause is an unnatural, and injurious one, and ought, gradually, 
if not rapidly, to be removed. 8 

The condition of the Treasury at this time would seem to render 
an early revision of the tariff indispensable. The Morrill bill, now 
pending before congress, may, or may not become a law. I am not 
posted as to it's particular provisions; but if they are generally 
satisfactory, and the bill shall now pass, there will be an end for 
the present. If, however, it shall not pass, I suppose the whole sub- 
ject will be one of the most pressing and important, for the next 
congress. By the constitution, the executive may recommend 
measures which he may think proper; and he may veto those he 
thinks improper; and it is supposed he may add to these, certain 
indirect influences to affect the action of congress. My political 
education strongly inclines me against a very free use of any of 
these means, by the Executive, to control the legislation of the 
country. As a rule, I think it better that congress should originate, 
as well as perfect its measures, without external bias. I therefore 
would rather recommend to every gentleman who knows he is to 

7 Not in Lincoln's handwriting. 

8 The remainder of the manuscript is in pencil and was probably written later 
than the first portion. 

[214] 



FEBRUARY 5, l86l 

be a member of the next congress, to take an enlarged view, and 
post himself thoroughly so as to contribute his part to such an 
adjustment of the tariff, as shall produce a sufficient revenue, and 
in in [szc] its other bearings, so far as possible, be just and equal 
to all sections of the country & classes of the people. 

Remarks at Alliance, Ohio 1 

February 15, 1861 

LADIES AND GEISTTLEIME]^: I appear before you merely to greet 
you and say farewell. I have no time for long speeches, and could 
not make them at every stopping place without wearing myself 
out. If I should make a speech at every town, I would not get to 
Washington until some time after the inauguration, [Laughter.] 
But as I am somewhat interested in the inauguration, I would like 
to get there a few days before the 4th of March. 

1 Salem, Ohio, Republican, February 20, 1861. Substantially the same as the 
resume given in the Canton, Ohio, Stark County Democrat 9 February 20, 1861. 



Speech at Cleveland, Ohio 1 

February 15, 1861 

MR. CHAIRMAN A3srr> FELLOW CITIZEISTS OF CLEVELAND: We 
have been inarching about two miles through snow, rain and deep 
mud. The large numbers that have turned out under these circum- 
stances testify that you are in earnest about something or other. 
But do I think so meanly of you as to suppose that that earnestness 
is about me personally? I would be doing you injustice to suppose 
you did. You have assembled to testify your, respect to the Union, 
the constitution and the laws, and here let me say that it is with 
you, the people, to advance the great cause of the Union and the 
constitution, and not with any one man. It rests with you alone. 
This fact is strongly impressed on my mind at present. In a com- 
munity like this, whose appearance testifies to their intelligence, 
I am convinced that the cause of liberty and the Union can never 
be in danger. Frequent allusion is made to the excitement at pres- 
ent existing in our national politics, and it is as well that I should also 
allude to it here. I think that there is no occasion for any excite- 
ment. The crisis, as it is called, is altogether an artificial crisis. In 
all parts of the nation there are differences of opinion and politics. 
There are differences of opinion even here. You did not all vote 
for the person who now addresses you. What is happening now 
will not hurt those who are farther away from here. Have they 
not all their rights now as they ever have had? Do they not have 

[215] 



FEBRUARY 5, l86l 

their fugitive slaves returned now as ever? Have they not the same 
constitution that they have lived under for seventy odd years? 
Have they not a position as citizens of this common country, and 
have we any power to change that position? (Cries of "No.") 
What then is the matter with them? "Why all this excitement? 
Why all these complaints? As I said before, this crisis is all arti- 
ficial. It has no foundation in facts. It was not argued up, as the 
saying is, and cannot, therefore, be argued down. Let it alone and 
it will go down of itself (Laughter). Mr. Lincoln said they must 
be content with but a few words from him. He was very much 
fatigued, and had spoken so frequently that he was already hoarse. 
He thanked them for the cordial and magnificent reception they 
had given him. Not less did he thank them for the votes they gave 
him last fall, and quite as much he thanked them for the efficient 
aid they had given the cause which he represented a cause which 
he would say "was a good one. He had one more word to say. He 
was given to understand that this reception was not tendered by 
his own party supporters, but by men of all parties. This is as it 
should be. If Judge Douglas had been elected and had been here 
on his way to Washington, as I am to-night, the republicans should 
have joined his supporters in welcoming him, just as his friends 
have joined with mine to-night. If all do not join now to save the 
good old ship of the Union this voyage nobody will have a chance 
to pilot her on another voyage. He concluded by thanking all pres- 
ent for the devotion they have shown to the cause of the Union. 

1 New York Herald, February 16, 1861. The text of this speech as printed in 
the Cleveland Commercial differs verbally to some degree, but is substantially 
the same as that reproduced here. Other New York papers and the Cincinnati 
Gazette have the same text as the Herald. 

To William E Hacker and Others 1 

Cleveland, Ohio, Feb. 15, 1861. 

Gentlemen: I have to-day received the invitation you extend to 
me on behalf of the Select and Common Councils of the City of 
Philadelphia, to visit the same and partake of its hospitalities, while 
on my way to the Federal capital. 

I accept with much gratitude the proffered honor, and hope to 
arrive in your society on Thursday, the aist instant, at four 
o'clock, P.M. Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN. 

Wm. P. Hacker, Esq., Chairman, and members 
of the Committee, &c. 

1 Philadelphia Inquirer, February 18, 1861. William P. Hacker was chairman 
of the committee to make arrangements for the reception at Philadelphia. 

[216] 



To Elihu B. Washburne 1 

Hon. E. B. Washburne Cleveland, O. 

My dear Sir Feb 15th 1861. 

I have decided to stop at a public, rather than a private house, 
when I reach Washington; and Mrs. L. objects to the National on 
account of the sickness four years ago. 2 With this to guide you, 
please call to your assistance all our Republican members from 
Illinois, and select and engage quarters for us. Yours as ever 

A. LINCOLN 

1 LS, IHi. 

2 At the time of President Buchanan's inauguration, a severe intestinal mal- 
ady afflicted guests at the National Hotel. Buchanan himself became ill, and in 
pro-Southern circles there were rumors of a Republican plot to poison Demo- 
cratic leaders. 

Remarks at Ravenna, Ohio 1 

February 15, 1861 

LADIES AINTD GENTLEMEN: I appear before you merely to greet 
you and say farewell. I have DO time for long speeches, and could 
not make them at every stopping place without wearing myself 
out. If I should make a speech at every town, I should not get to 
Washington until some time after the inauguration. (Laughter.) I 
am, however, all the time sensible of the deepest gratitude to the 
people of Ohio for their large contribution to the cause -which I 
think is the just one. There are doubtless those here who did not 
vote for me, but I believe we make common cause for the Union 
("That's so." "We are with you there," &c.) But let me tell to 
those who did not vote for me, an anecdote of a certain Irish friend 
that I met yesterday. He said he did not vote for me, but went for' 
Douglas. "Now," said I to him, "I will tell you what you ought to 
do in that case. If we all turn in and keep the ship from sinking 
this voyage, there may be a chance for Douglas on the next; but 
if we let it go down now, neither he nor anybody else will have 
an opportunity of sailing in it again." Now, was not that good 
advice? ("Yes, yes," "that's the talk.") Once more, let me say 
good-bye. 

1 Portage, OHio, Sentinel, February 20, 1861. 

Remarks at Hudson, Ohio 1 

February 15, 1861 

Ladies and Gentlemen: I stepped upon this platform to see 
you, and to give you an opportunity of seeing me, which I suppose 

[217] 



FEBRUARY 1 6, l86l 

you desire to do. You see by my voice that I am quite hoarse. You 
will not, therefore, expect a speech from me. 

1 Akron, Ohio, Summit County Beacon, February 21, 1861. 

Remarks at Painesville, Ohio 1 

February 16, 1861 

LADIES ATXV GEi^TLEiMEisr I have stepped out upon this plat- 
form that I may see you and that you may see me, and in the ar- 
rangement I have the best of the bargain. The train only stops for 
a few minutes, so that I have time to make but few remarks, and 
the condition of my voice is such that I could not do more if there 
were time. We are met by large crowds of people at almost every 
ten miles, but in few instances where there are so many as here, 
or where there are so many (turning towards them and bowing) 
good-looking ladies. I can only say now that I bid you good morn- 
ing and farewell. 

Then turning towards it he said, "let us have the better music 
from the Band." 

1 Paines-ville Telegraph, February 21, 1861. The Cleveland Plain Dealer, 
February 16, gives a shorter but similar report. 



Remarks at Ashtabula, Ohio 1 

February 16, 1861 

. . . . "I can only say how do you do, and farewell, as my voice 
you perceive will warrant nothing more. I am happy to see so 
many pleasant faces around me and to be able to greet you as 
friends." 

As he bowed in conclusion, some one on behalf of the ladies, 
called for Mrs. Lincoln, to which the president replied that "he 
should hardly hope to induce her to appear, as he had always found 
it very difficult to make her do what she did not want to." 
1 Ashtabula Weekly Telegraph, February 23, 1861. 

Remarks at Conneaut, Ohio 1 

February 16, 1861 

I have lost my voice and cannot make a speech, but my inten- 
tions are good. He then thanked the people for the kindly demon- 
stration, and as the cars commenced to move slowly forward 
through the crowd which lined both sides of the track, Capt. Apple- 
by, our fellow-townsman, called out to him, "Don't give up the 

[218] 



FEBRUARY 1 6 ? l86l 

ship!" To which Mr. Lincoln responded "with your aid I never 
will as long as life lasts." 

1 Conneaut Reporter ; February 21, 1861. 

Remarks at Erie, Pennsylvania 1 

February 16, 1861 

Being hoarse and fatigued, he excused himself from speaking at 
any length or expressing his opinions on the exciting questions of 
the day. He trusted that when the time for speaking, fully and 
plainly, should come, he would say nothing not in accordance with 
the Constitution and the Laws and the manifest interests of the 
whole country. Counselling all to firmness, forbearance, and pa- 
triotic adherence to the Constitution and the Union, he retired 
amidst applause. 

1 Erie Weekly Gazette, February 21, 1861. 

Remarks at Westfield, New York 1 

February 16, 1861 

At Westfield, Mr. LusrcoLisr greeted a large crowd of ladies, and 
several thousand of the sterner sex. Addressing the ladies, he said, 
"I am glad to see you; I suppose you are to see me; but I certainly 
think I have the best of the bargain. (Applause,) Some three 
months ago, I received a letter from a young lady here; it was a 
very pretty letter, and she advised me to let my whiskers grow, 
as it would improve my personal appearance; acting partly upon 
her suggestion, I have done so; and now, if she is here, I would 
like to see her; I think her name was Miss BARLEY." 2 A small boy, 
mounted on a post, with his mouth and eyes both wide open, cried 
out, "there she is, Mr. LINCOLN," pointing to a beautiful girl, with 
black eyes, who was blushing all over her fair face. The President 
left the car, and the crowd making way for him, he reached her, 
and gave her several hearty kisses, and amid the yells of delight 
from the excited crowd, he bade her good-bye, and on we rushed. 

1 Philadelphia Inquirer, February 20, 1861. 

2 Grace Bedell. See Lincoln's letter, October 19, 860, supra. 

Remarks at Dunkirk, New York 1 

February 16, 1861 

At Dunkirk, at least 12,000 or 15,000 were assembled, a tri- 
umphal arch was erected over the track, with Union mottoes upon 
it, music and military surrounded us, fair ladies waved their 

[219] 



FEBRUARY 1 6, l86l 

handkerchiefs, and a platform around a flag staff, covered -with 
velvet carpet, was prepared for Mr. LINCOLN to speak from. He 
stepped from the cars upon it, and as the tumult subsided, said, "I 
am glad to meet you all; I regret I cannot stop to speak to you, 
but were I to stop and make a speech at every station, I would not 
reach Washington until after the inauguration. Standing as I do, 
luith my hand upon this staff., and under the folds of the American 

flag*> I ASK: YOU TO STA3NTD BY 1ME SO LONG AS I STAND BY IT. 
1 Philadelphia Inquirer^ February 20, 1861. 

Speech at Buffalo-, New York 1 

February 16, 1861 

Mr. Mayor, and Fellow Citizens of Buffalo and the State of New 
York: I am here to thank you briefly for this grand reception 
given to me, not personally, but as the representative of our great 
and beloved country. (Cheers.) Your worthy Mayor has been 
pleased to mention in his address to me, the fortunate and agree- 
able journey which I have had from home, on my rather circui- 
tous route to the Federal Capital. I am very happy that he was en- 
abled in truth to congratulate myself and companions [company] 
on that fact. It is true we have had nothing, thus far, to mar the 
pleasure of the trip. We have not been met alone by those who as- 
sisted in giving the election to me I say not alone but by the 
whole population of the country through which we have passed. 
This is as it should be. 

Had the election fallen to any other of the distinguished candi- 
dates instead of myself, under the peculiar circumstances, to say 
the least, it would have been proper for all citizens to have greeted 
him as you now greet me. It is evidence of the devotion of the 
whole people to the Constitution, the Union, and the perpetuity of 
the liberties of this country. (Cheers.) I am unwilling, on any oc- 
casion, that I should be so meanly thought of, as to have it supposed 
for a moment that I regard these demonstrations as tendered to me 
personally. They should be tendered to no individual man. They 
are tendered to the country, to the institutions of the country, and 
to the perpetuity of the [liberties of the] country for which these 
institutions were made and created. 

Your worthy Mayor has thought fit to express the hope that I 
may be able to relieve the country from its present or I should 
say, its threatened difficulties. I am sure I bring a heart true to 
the work. (Tremendous applause.) For the ability to perform it, I 
must trust in that Supreme Being who has never forsaken this 

[220] 



FEBRUARY 1 8, 1 8 6 1 

favored land, through the instrumentality of this great and intelli- 
gent people. Without that assistance I shall surely fail. With it I 
cannot fail. 

When we speak of threatened difficulties to the country, it is 
natural that there should be expected from me something with 
regard to particular measures. Upon more mature reflection, how- 
ever, others "will agree with me that when it is considered that 
these difficulties are without precedent, and have never been acted 
upon by any individual situated as I am, it is most proper I 
should wait, see the developments, and get all the light I can, so 
that when I do speak authoritatively I may be as near right as 
possible. (Cheers.) When I shall speak authoritatively, I hope to 
say nothing inconsistent with the Constitution, the Union, the 
rights of all the States, of each State, and of each section of the 
country, and not to disappoint the reasonable expectations of those 
who have confided to me their votes. 

In this connection allow me to say that you, as a portion of the 
great American people, need only to maintain your composure. 
Stand up to your sober convictions of right, to your obligations to 
the Constitution, act in accordance with those sober convictions, 
and the clouds which now arise in the horizon will be dispelled, 
and we shall have a bright and glorious future; and when this 
generation has passed away, tens of thousands will inhabit this 
country where only thousands inhabit [it] now. 

I do not propose to address you at length I have no voice for 
it. Allow me again to thank you for this magnificent reception, 
and bid you farewell. 

1 Buffalo Morning Express, February 18, 1861; New York Herald, February 
17, 1861. The Express and Herald texts are substantially the same. At a few 
points important variations in the Herald are given in brackets. 

Remarks at Batavia, New York 1 

February 18, 1861 

At Batavia, gray as was the light and deep as was the snow, 
there was a very large gathering of people, who saluted Mr. LIN- 
COLN with cheers and with the firing of cannon. Of course they 
wanted to hear him speak, but to their calls he replied that he did 
not appear before them or the country as a talker, nor did he desire 
to obtain a reputation as such. He thanked them for the kind at- 
tention manifested by their rising at so inconvenient an hour, and 
bade them farewell amidst a burst of genuine enthusiasm. 

1 New York Times, February 19, 1861. 

[221] 



Remarks at Rochester, New York 1 

February 18, 1861 

I confess myself, after having seen large audiences since leaving 
home, overwhelmed with this vast number of faces at this hour of 
the morning. I am not vain enough to believe that you are here 
from any wish to see me as an individual, but because I am, for 
the time being, the representative of the American people. I could 
not, if I would, address you at any length. I have not the strength, 
even if I had the time, for a speech at these many interviews that 
are afforded me on my way to Washington. I appear merely to see 
you, and to let you see me, and to bid you farewell. I hope it will 
be understood that it is from no disposition to disoblige anybody, 
that I do not address you at greater length. 

!New York Times,, Tribune, and Herald, February 19, 1861. 

Remarks at Clyde, New York 1 

February 18, 1861 

At Clyde an enthusiastic crowd was gathered, who welcomed 
Mr. Lincoln with a salute and cheers. He thanked the people for 
the welcome, but had no speech to make, and no time to make it in. 
He was glad to see them, and bade them good morning. 
*New York Tribune, February 19, 1861. 

Remarks at Syracuse, New York 1 

February 18, 1861 

LADIES AND GEISTTLEMEIN": I see you have erected a very fine and 
handsome platform here for me, and I presume you expected me 
to speak from it. If I should go upon it you would imagine that I 
was about to deliver you a much longer speech than I am. I wish 
you to understand that I mean no discourtesy to you by thus de- 
clining. I intend discourtesy to no one. But I wish you to under- 
stand that though I am unwilling to go upon this platform, you 
are not at liberty to draw any inferences concerning any other 
platform with which my name has been or is connected. [Laughter 
and applause.] I wish you a long life and prosperity individually, 
and pray that with the perpetuity of those institutions under which 
we have all so long lived and prospered, our happiness may be se- 
cured, our future made brilliant, and the glorious destiny of our 
country established forever. I bid you a kind farewell. 
1 New York Times, February 19, 1861. 

[222] 



Remarks at Utica, New York 1 

February 18, 1861 

Ladies and Gentlemen I have but a short speech to make you. 
I have no time to make remarks of any length. I appear before 
you to bid you farewell to see you, and to allow you all to see me. 
At the same time I acknowledge, ladies, that I think I have the best 
of the bargain in the sight. I only appear to greet you, and to say 
farewell. I will come out again on the platform before the train 
leaves, so that you may see me. 

(Mr. Lincoln was then introduced to a number of gentlemen on 
the car, passing around at the same time, until he reached the 
north side, when he made the following remarks) : 

Gentlemen I come around to say to you what I did to those 
on the other side, which was but a f ew words, and little more than 
good morning, as it were, and farewell. I can't however say here, 
exactly what I did on the other side, as there are no ladies on this 
side. I said that there were so many ladies present that I had the 
best part of the sight, but bear in mind I don't make any such ad- 
mission now. Farewell! 

1 Utica Evening Telegraphy February 18, 1861. 

Remarks at Little Falls, New York 1 

February 18, 1861 

Ladies and Gentlemen: I appear before you merely for the pur- 
pose of greeting you, saying a few words and bidding you farewell. 
I have no speech to make, and no sufficient time to make one if I 
had; nor have I the strength to repeat a speech, at all the places 
at which I stop, even if all the other circumstances were favorable. 
I have come to see you and allow you to see me (Applause) and 
in this so far [as] regards the Ladies, I have the best of the bargain 
on my side. I don't make that acknowledgement to the gentlemen, 
(Increased laughter) and now I believe I have really made my 
speech and am ready to bid you farewell when the cars move on. 
1 Herkimer, New York, Democrat, February 20, 1861. 

Remarks at Fonda, New York 1 

February 18, 1861 

At Fonda, in response to enthusiastic greetings, Mr. Lincoln 
made a short speech, and, in declining to mount a platform pre- 
pared for him, said that, though he would not get upon zY, he wished 

[223] 



FEBRUARY 1 8, l86l 

it to be distinctly understood that he would never shrink from a 
platform on which he properly belonged. 
1 New York Times, February 19, 1861. 

Remarks at Schenectady, New York 1 

February 18, 1861 

Mr. Lincoln, appearing at the rear end of the car, being intro- 
duced by Hon. Judge Potter, 2 said that he saw they had done him 
the honor of erecting a very handsome platform here, but he 
should be obliged to decline using it, not that he repudiated plat- 
forms, but because he had refused to speak on one at other places. 
He really had no speech to make, no time to make one, and no 
sufficient strength to make one. You are all here to see and to be 
seen, but where there are so many assembled he thought that he 
obtained the best view. And now he must bid them all farewell as 
the train would soon start. We were only able to obtain a f ew dis- 
jointed sentences of what the President said. 

1 Schenectady Daily Evening Star, February 19, 1861. 

2 Platt Potter, judge of the Supreme Court of New York (1856-1873). 

Reply to Mayor George H. Thacher 
at Albany, New York 1 

February 18, 1861 

MR. MAYOR: I can hardly appropriate to myself the flattering 
terms in which you communicate the tender of this reception, as 
personal to ray self, I most gratefully accept the hospitalities ten- 
dered to me, and will not detain you or the audience with any ex- 
tended remarks at this time. I presume that in the two or three 
courses through which I shall have to go, I shall have to repeat 
somewhat, and I will therefore only repeat 2 to you my thanks for 
this kind reception. 

1 New York Herald and Times, February 19, 1861. 

2 New York Tribune, February 19, 1861, reads "express." 

Reply to Governor Edwin D. Morgan 
at Albany., New York 1 

February 18, 1861 

Mr. GOVERNOR I was pleased to receive an invitation to visit 
the capital of the great Empire State of this nation on my way to 

[224] 



FEBRUARY 18, l86l 

the federal capital, and I now thank you, Mr. Governor, and the 
people of this capital and the people of the State of New York, for 
this most hearty and magnificent welcome. If I am not at fault, the 
great Empire State at this time contains a greater population than 
did the United States of America at the time she achieved her na- 
tional independence. I am proud to be invited to pass through your 
capital and meet them, as I now have the honor to do. I am noti- 
fied by your Governor that this reception is given without distinc- 
tion of party. I accept it more gladly because it is so. Almost all 
men in this country, and in any country where freedom of thought 
is tolerated, attach themselves to political parties. It is but ordinary 
charity to attribute this to the fact that in so attaching himself to 
the party which his judgment prefers, the citizen believes he there- 
by promotes the best interests of the whole country; and when an 
election is passed, it is altogether befitting a free people, that until 
the next election, they should be as one people. The reception you 
have extended to me to-day is not given to me personally. It should 
not be so, but as the representative for the time being of the ma- 
jority of the nation. If the election had resulted in the selection of 
either of the other candidates, the same cordiality should have 
been extended him, as is extended to me this da}^ in their testi- 
mony of the devotion of the whole people to the Constitution and 
to the whole Union, and of their desire to perpetuate our institu- 
tions, and to hand them down in their perfection to succeeding 
generations. I have neither the voice nor the strength to address 
you at any greater length. I beg you will accept my most grateful 
thanks for this devotion, not to me, but to this great and glorious 
free country. 

1 New York Herald and Times, February 19, 1861. The New York Tribune 
text, same date, is at considerable verbal variance, but the variations are not 
sufficiently significant to merit collation. 

Address to the Legislature 
at Albany, New York 1 

February 18, 1861 

MR. PRESIDENT AND GENTLEMEN OP THE LEGISLATURE OF THE 
STATE OF NEW YORK: It is with feelings of great diffidence, and I 
may say with feelings of awe, perhaps greater than I have recent- 
ly experienced, that I meet you here in this place. The history of 
this great State, the renown of those great men who have stood 
here, and spoke here, and been heard here, all crowd around my 
fancy, and incline me to shrink from any attempt to address you. 

[225] 



FEBRUARY 1 8, l86l 

Yet I have some confidence given me by the generous manner in 
which you have invited me, and by the still more generous man- 
ner in which you have received me to speak further. You have in- 
vited and received me without distinction of party. I cannot for 
a moment suppose that this has been done in any considerable de- 
gree with reference to my personal services, but that it is done in 
so far as I am regarded at this time as the representative of the 
majesty [majority] of this great nation. I doubt not this is the 
truth and the whole truth of the case, and this is as it should be. 
It is much more gratifying to me that this reception has been given 
to me as the representative of a free people than it could possibly 
be if tendered me [merely] as an evidence of devotion to me, or 
to any one man personally, and now I think it were more fitting 
that I should close these hasty remarks. It is true that while I hold 
myself without mock modesty, the humblest of all individuals that 
have ever been elevated to the Presidency, I have a more difficult 
task to perform than any one of them. You have generously ten- 
dered me the united support of the great Empire State. For this, in 
behalf of the nation, in behalf of the present and future of the 
nation, in behalf of the civil and religious liberty for all time to 
come, most gratefully do I thank you. I do not propose to enter in- 
to an explanation of any particular line of policy as to our present 
difficulties to be adopted by the incoming administration. I deem 
it just to you, to myself and to all that I should see everything, that 
I should hear everything, that I should have every light that can 
be brought within my reach, in order that when I do so speak, I 
shall have enjoyed every opportunity to take correct and true 
ground; and for this reason I don't propose to speak at this time of 
the policy of the Government; but when the time comes I shall 
speak as well as I am able for the good of the present and future 
of this country for the good both of the North and the South of 
this country for the good of the one and the other, and of all 
sections of the country. [Rounds of applause.] In the mean time, 
if we have patience; if we restrain ourselves; if we allow ourselves 
not to run off in a passion, I still have confidence that the Al- 
mighty, the Maker of the Universe will, through the instrumental- 
ity of this great and intelligent people, bring us through this as 
He has through all the other difficulties of our country. Relying on 
this, I again thank you for this generous reception. [Applause and 
cheers.] 

1 New York Times, Herald, and Tribune, February 19, 1861. The Times and 
Herald have practically the same text. Bracketed words are variants in the 
Herald or Tribune. 

[226] 



Reply to M. I. Townsend and Committee 1 

February 18, 1861 

I shall be obliged to go by way of Troy in pursuing my journey 
to-morrow morning. It is with pleasure, therefore, that I accept 
your invitation. I shall only be able to remain a f ew moments "with 
you. But I appreciate the compliment of the invitation. I will spend 
just as much time with you as the train permits. In this, as in other 
matters, it is my intention as it shall be my purpose to do everything 
possible to gratify my friends. 

1 Troy, New York, Daily Times ^ February 19, 1861. Townsend and members 
of a committee from Troy called upon Lincoln at the Delavan House, Albany, 
New York, to invite Tiitn to visit Troy the next day. 



Remarks at Troy, New York 1 

February 19, 1861 

Mr. Mayor and Felloiv Citizens of Troy, Neiu York: I am here 
to thank you for this noble demonstration of the citizens of Troy, 
and I accept this flattering reception with feelings of profound 
gratefulness. Since having left home, I confess, sir, having seen 
large assemblages of the people, but this immense gathering more 
than exceeds anything I have ever seen before. Still, fellow citi- 
zens, I am not so vain as to suppose that you have gathered to do 
me honor as an individual, but rather as the representative for 
the fleeting time of the American people. I have appeared only 
that you might see me and I you, and I am not sure but that I 
have the best of the sight. 

Again thanking you, fellow citizens, I bid you an affectionate 
farewell. 

1 Troy Daily Budget, February 19, 1861. THe New York Herald and Tribune,, 
February 20, report Lincoln's remarks at Troy "with, considerable verbal vari- 
ance from the Budget, and between themselves. The import is the same, how- 
ever, and the variations are scarcely worth collating. Lincoln was welcomed 
by Mayor Isaac McConihe. 



Remarks at Hudson, New York 1 

February 19, 1861 

FELLOW CITIZENS: I see that you have provided a platform, 
but I shall have to decline standing on it. (Laughter and ap- 
plause.) The Superintendent tells me I have not time during our 
brief stay here to leave the train. I had to decline standing on some 

[227] 



FEBRUARY IQ, l86l 

very handsome platforms prepared for me yesterday. But I say to 
you, as I said to them, you must not on this account draw the infer- 
ence that I have any intention to desert any platform I have a le- 
gitimate right to stand on. I do not appear before you for the pur- 
pose of making a speech, I come only to see you and to give you the 
opportunity to see me; and I say to you, as I have before said to 
crowds where there were so many handsome ladies as there are 
here, I have decidedly the best of the bargain. I have only, there- 
fore, to thank you most cordially for this kind reception, and bid 
you all f arewell. 

* New York Herald, February 20, 1861. The New York Tribune version is 
shorter but substantially the same. 

Remarks at Poughkeepsie, New York 1 

February 19, 1861 

I cannot expect to make myself heard by any considerable num- 
ber of you, my friends, but I appear here rather for the purpose of 
seeing you and being seen by you. (Laughter.) I do not believe 
that you extend this welcome one of the finest I have ever re- 
ceived to the individual man who now addresses you but rather 
to the person who represents for the time being the majesty of the 
constitution and the government. (Cheers.) I suppose that here, 
as everywhere, you meet me without distinction of party, but as 
the people. (Cries of "yes/' "yes.") It is with your aid, as the 
people, that I think we shall be able to preserve not the country, 
for the country will preserve itself, (cheers), but the institutions 
of the country (great cheering); those institutions which have 
made us free, intelligent and happy the most free, the most in- 
telligent and the happiest people on the globe. (Tremendous ap- 
plause.) I see that some, at least, of you are of those who believe 
that an election being decided against them is no reason why they 
should sink the ship. ("Hurrah.") I believe with you, I believe in 
sticking to it, and carrying it through; and, if defeated at one elec- 
tion, I believe in taking the chances next time. (Great laughter 
and applause.) I do not think that they have chosen the best man 
to conduct our affairs, now I am sure they did not (here the 
speaker was interrupted by noise and confusion in another part of 
the crowd) but acting honestly and sincerely, and with your aid, 
I think we shall be able to get through the storm. (Here Mr. Sloan 
caught hold of Mr. Lincoln's arm and pulled him around to see 
the locomotives the Union and Constitution which passed gaily 
dressed with flags. Turning hastily, Mr. Lincoln continued) In 

[228] 



FEBRUARY 1 Q, 1 8 6 1 

addition to what I have said, I have only to bid you farewell. 
(Cheers and a salute, amid which the train moved on.) 

1 New York Herald, February 20, 1861. Tlie New York Tribune version is 
considerably more verbose, but substantially the same. 

Remarks at Fishkill, New York 1 

LADIES AINT> GErsTTLEiMEKT : February 19, 1861 

I appear before you not to make a speech. I have no sufficient 
time, if I had the strength, to repeat speeches at every station where 
the people kindly gather to welcome me as we go along. If I had 
the strength, and should take the time, I should not get to Wash- 
ington until after inauguration, which you must be aware "would 
not fit exactly. (Laughter.) That such an untoward event might 
not transpire, I know you will readily forego any further remarks; 
and I close by bidding you farewell. (Loud cheers.) 

1 New York Tribune, February 20, 1861. 

Remarks at PeekskilL, New York 1 

February 19, 1861 

LADIES ATSTD GEisrTLEMErNT: I have but a moment to stand before 
you to listen to and return your kind greeting. I thank you for 
this reception and for the pleasant manner in which it is tendered 
to me by our mutual friends. I will say in a single sentence, in re- 
gard to the difficulties that lie before me and our beloved country, 
that if I can only be as generously and unanimously sustained as 
the demonstrations I have witnessed indicate I shall be, I shall not 
fail; but without your sustaining hands I am sure that neither I 
nor any other man can hope to surmount those difficulties. I trust 
that in the course I shall pursue I shall be sustained, not only by 
the party that elected me, but by the patriotic people of the whole 
country, 

1 New York Herald, February 20, 1861. The New York Tribune version dif- 
fers verbally, but is substantially the same. 

Remarks upon Arriving at the Astor House, 

New York City 1 

February 19, 1861 

FELLOW CITIZENS I have stepped before you merely in com- 
pliance with what appeared to be your wish, and with no purpose 

[229] 



FEBRUARY lQ-> l86l 

of making a speech. In fact, I do not propose making a speech this 
afternoon. I could not be heard by any but a very small fraction 
of you at best; but what is still worse than that is, that I have 
nothing just now to say worth your hearing. (Loud applause.) I 
beg you to believe that I do not now refuse to address you through 
any disposition to disoblige you, but the contrary. But at the same 
time I beg of you to excuse me for the present. 

1 New York Herald, February 20, 1861. The New York Tribune version is 
substantially the same. 

Speech at the Astor House., New York City 1 

February 19, 1861 

Mr. CHAIRMAN AISTD GEINTTLEMETST: I am rather an old man to 
avail myself of such an excuse as I am now about to do, yet the 
truth is so distinct and presses itself so distinctly upon me that I 
cannot well avoid it, and that is that I did not understand when I 
was brought into this room that I was brought here to mate a 
speech. It was not intimated to me that I was brought into the 
room where Daniel Webster and Henry Clay had made speeches, 2 
and where one in my position might be expected to do something 
like those men, or do something unworthy of myself or my audi- 
ence. I therefore will beg you to make very great allowance for 
the circumstances under which I have been by surprise brought 
before you. Now, I have been in the habit of thinking and speak- 
ing for some time upon political questions that have for some years 
past agitated the country, and if I were disposed to do so, and we 
could take up some one of the issues as the lawyers call them, and 
I were called upon to make an argument about it to the best of my 
ability, I could do that without much preparation. But that is not 
what you desire to be done here to-night. I have been occupying 
a position, since the Presidential election, of silence, of avoiding 
public speaking, of avoiding public writing. I have been doing so 
because I thought, upon full consideration, that was the proper 
course for me to take. (Great applause.) I am brought before you 
now and required to make a speech, when you all approve, more 
than anything else, of the fact that I have been silent (loud 
laughter, cries of "Good good," and applause) and now it seems 
to me from the response you give to that remark it ought to justify 
me in closing just here. (Great laughter.)! have not kept silent 
since the Presidential election from any party wantonness, or from 
any indifference to the anxiety that pervades the minds of men about 
the aspect of the political affairs of this country. I have kept si- 

[230] 



FEBRUARY 1Q, l86l 

lence for the reason that I supposed it was peculiarly proper that 
I should do so until the time came when, according to the customs 
of the country, I should speak officially. (Voice, partially inter- 
rogative, partially sarcastic, "Custom of the country?") I heard 
some gentleman say, "According to the custom of the country;" I 
alluded to the custom of the President elect at the time of taking 
his oath of office. That is what I meant by the custom of the 
country. I do suppose that while the political drama being enacted 
in this country at this time is rapidly shifting in its scenes, for- 
bidding an anticipation with any degree of certainty to-day what 
we shall see to-morrow, that it was peculiarly fitting that I should 
see it all up to the last minute before I should take ground, that 
I might be disposed by the shifting of the scenes afterwards again 
to shift. (Applause.) I said several times upon this journey, and I 
now repeat it to you, that when the time does come I shall then 
take the ground that I think is right (interruption by cries of 
"Good," "good," and applause) the ground I think is right for 
the North, for the South, for the East, for the "West, for the whole 
country (cries of "Good," "Hurrah for Lincoln," and great ap- 
plause) . And in doing so I hope to feel no necessity pressing upon 
me to say anything in conflict with the constitution, in conflict 
with the continued union of these States (applause) in conflict 
with the perpetuation of the liberties of these people (cheers) 
or anything in conflict with anything whatever that I have ever 
given you reason to expect from me. (Loud cheers.) And now, my 
friends, have I said enough. (Cries of "No, no," "Go on," &c.) 
Now, my friends, there appears to be a difference of opinion be- 
tween you and me, and I feel called upon to insist upon deciding 
the question myself. (Enthusiastic cheers.) 

1 New York Herald, February 20, 1861. The New York Tribune text is sub- 
stantially the same, but omits some phrases and sentences. The reception at 
which Lincoln spoke was held on the night of February 19. 

2 In introducing Lincoln, E. Delafield Smith had alluded to the fact that 
the reception room at the Astor House had been the scene of receptions 
honoring "Webster and Clay. 



To the People of Newark, New Jersey 1 

[February 19, 1861] 

I shall be, able to do no more than to bow to the people of New 
Ark from the train A 



1 ALS-F, ISLA. This brief note was written at the Astor House, probably 
in response to an inquiry from Newark Republicans. 

[231] 



Reply to the Brooklyn Common Council 
Committee, New York City 1 

February 19, 1861 

.... Mr. Lincoln thanked the authorities of Brooklyn for their 
kind attention, and regretted that his engagements, during his 
brief stay in New York, would not permit him to visit the city of 
churches, though it would have afforded him much pleasure to 
have done so, had circumstances permitted. 

1 Philadelphia Inquirer, February 21, 1861. 



Announcement in the Illinois State Journal 

February 20, 1861 

The notes and papers of Mr. Liisrcomsr are left with Mr. ROBERT 
IRWIIST, where persons interested can find them. If any of his ac- 
counts are left unpaid, Mr. iRwm will pay them on being satis- 
fied of their correctness. A. 
Feb. 20, 1861. 

1 Illinois State Journal, February 21, 1861. 



Reply to Mayor Fernando Wood 
at New York City 1 

February 20, 1861 

Mr. MAYOR It is with feelings of deep gratitude that I make 
my acknowledgment for this reception which has been given me in 
the great commercial city of New York. I cannot but remember 
that this is done by a people who do not by a majority agree 
with me in political sentiments. It is the more grateful [to 
me] because in this reception I see that, in regard to the great 
principles of our government, the people are very nearly or quite 
unanimous. 

In reference to the difficulties that confront us at this time, and 
of which your Honor thought fit to speak so becomingly, and so 
justly as I suppose, I can only say that I fully concur in the senti- 
ments expressed by the Mayor. In my devotion to the Union I hope 
I am behind no man in the Union; but as to the wisdom with which 
to conduct affairs tending to the preservation of the Union, I fear 

[232] 



FEBRUARY 21, l86l 

that even too great confidence may have been reposed [placed] in 
me. I am sure I bring a heart devoted to the work. 

There is nothing that can ever bring me willingly to consent 
to the destruction of this Union, tinder which not only the commer- 
cial city of New York, but the whole country has acquired its 
greatness, unless it were to be that thing for which the Union it- 
self was made. I understand a ship to be made for the carrying 
and preservation of the cargo, and so long as the ship can be saved, 
with the cargo, it should never be abandoned. This Union should 
likewise never be abandoned "unless it fails and the probability 
of its preservation shall cease to exist -without throwing the pas- 
sengers and cargo overboard. So long, then, as it is possible that 
the prosperity and the liberties of the people can be preserved in the 
Union, it shall be my purpose at all times to preserve it. Thanking 
you for the reception given me, allow me to come to a close. 

1 New York Herald, February 21, 1861. The significant verbal variations in 
the New York Tribune report have been inserted in brackets. Lincoln spoke at 
City Hall. 



Remarks from the Balcony of City Hall, 
New York City 1 

February 20, 1861 

FRIENDS: I do not appear for the purpose of making a speech. I 
design to make no speech. I came merely to see you, and allow 
you to see me. [Cheers.] And I have to say to you, as I have said 
frequently to audiences on my journey, that, in the sight, I have 
the best of the bargain. [Tremendous cheers.] Assuming that you 
are all for the Constitution, the Union [renewed cheering], and 
the perpetual liberties of this people, I bid you farewell. [Cheers.] 

1 New York Tribune and Herald, February 21, 1861. The texts are prac- 
tically identical. 



Remarks at Jersey City, New Jersey 1 

February 21, 1861 

Ladies and gentlemen of the State of New- Jersey, I shall only 
thank you briefly for this very kind and cordial reception not as 
given to me individually, but as to the representative of the chief 
magistracy of this great nation. I cannot make any speech now to 

[233] 



FEBRUARY 21, l86l 

you, as I shall be met frequently to-day in the same manner as 
you have received me here, and, therefore, have not the strength 
to address you at length. I am here before you care-worn, for little 
else than to greet you, and to say farewell. You have done me the 
very high honor to present your reception of me through your own 
great man a man with whom it is an honor to be associated any- 
where a man with whom no State could be poor. [Applause, long 
continued.] His remarks of welcome, though brief, deserve an 
hour's well-considered reply; but time, and the obligations before 
me, render it necessary for me to close my remarks allow me to 
bid you a kind and grateful farewell. 

Mr. Lincoln's remarks were received with demonstrations of 
applause, and the waving of handkerchiefs. 

Loud calls were then made for Vice-President Hamlin; but it 
was announced that he was not present, and would be detained in 
New- York till to-morrow. 

Then followed a rush to shake hands with Mr. Lincoln, and in 
the rush and crush the policemen and reporters were nearly anni- 
hilated. Loud cries were kept up for "Lincoln, Lincoln," and to 
quiet the crowd Mr. Lincoln once more came to the front of the 
platform and said: 

There appears to be a desire to see more of me, and I can only 
say that from my position, especially when I look around the gal- 
lery (bowing to the ladies), I feel that I have decidedly the best 
of the bargain, and in this matter I am for no compromises here. 
[Applause and much laughter.] 

1 New York Tribune, February 22, 1861. William L. Dayton, attorney gen- 
eral of New Jersey, introduced Loncoln. 



Remarks at Newark, New Jersey 1 

February 21, 1861 

MAYOR: I thank you for the reception to your city, and 
would say in response, that I bring a heart sincerely devoted to the 
work you desire I should do. With my own ability I cannot suc- 
ceed, without the sustenance of Divine Providence, and of this 
great, free, happy, and intelligent people. Without these I cannot 
hope to succeed; with them I cannot fail. Again I return you my 
thanks. [Cheers.] 

1 New York Tribune, February 22, 1861. Other papers reported the speech 
with wide latitude of verbal differences, but the substance is the same. Follow- 

[234] 



FEBRUARY 21, l86l 

ing the remarks, Lincoln was driven through town in an open barouche to the 
"upper depot" where the train had proceeded, and where he was agam intro- 
duced and "made a few remarks, thanking the townspeople for their com- 
plimentary turnout. . . ." (New York World, February 22). 



Remarks at New Brunswick., New Jersey 1 

February 21, 1861 

Mr. L. then made a few remarks, saying substantially that "he 
was gratified with the manifestations of respect and kind feelings 
which his fellow-citizens were pleased to give so frequently; that 
he did not appear before them to make a speech, because he had 
none to make, and didn't know that it would be proper to make a 
speech even if he had one to make and the disposition to make it. 
He appeared to see them and give them an opportunity to see him; 
to say good morning to them, and, when the cars started off, to 
say farewell." 

1 New Brunswick Fredonian, February 21, 1861. Lincoln was introduced from 
the rear platform of the last car by Judge John Van Dyke. 



Address to the New Jersey Senate 
at Trenton-, New Jersey 1 

February 21, 1861 

MR. PRESIDENT AND GENTLEMEN OF THE SENATE OF THE STATE 
OF NEW- JERSEY: I am very grateful to you for the honorable 
reception of which I have been the object. I cannot but remember 
the place that New- Jersey holds in our early history. In the early 
Revolutionary struggle, few of the States among the old Thirteen 
had more of the battle-fields of the country within their limits than 
old New- Jersey. May I be pardoned if, upon this occasion, I men- 
tion that away back in my childhood, the earliest days of my being 
able to read, I got hold of a small book, such a one as few of the 
younger members have ever seen, "Weem's Life of Washington." I 
remember all the accounts there given of the battle fields and 
struggles for the liberties of the country, and none fixed themselves 
upon my imagination so deeply as the struggle here at Trenton, 
New- Jersey. The crossing of the river; the contest with the Hes- 
sians; the great hardships endured at that time, all fixed them- 
selves on my memory more than any single revolutionary event; 
and you all know, for you have all been boys, how these early im- 

[235] 



FEBRUARY W 21, l86l 

pressions last longer than any others. I recollect thinking then, 
boy even though I was, that there must have been something more 
than common that those men struggled for. I am exceedingly 
anxious that that thing which they struggled for; that something 
even more than National Independence; that something that held 
out a great promise to all the people of the world to all time to 
come; I am exceedingly anxious that this Union, the Constitution, 
and the liberties of the people shall be perpetuated in accordance 
with the original idea for which that struggle was made, and I 
shall be most happy indeed if I shall be an humble instrument in 
the hands of the Almighty, and of this, his almost chosen people, 
for perpetuating the object of that great struggle. You give me this 
reception, as I understand, without distinction of party. I learn 
that this body is composed of a majority of gentlemen who, in the 
exercise of their best judgment in the choice of a Chief Magis- 
trate, did not think I was the man. I understand, nevertheless, that 
they came forward here to greet me as the constitutional President 
of the United States as citizens of the United States, to meet the 
man who, for the time being, is the representative man of the na- 
tion, united by a purpose to perpetuate the Union and liberties of 
the people. As such, I accept this reception more gratefully than I 
could do did I believe it was tendered to me as an individual. 

1 New York Tribune, February 22, 1861. 



Address to the New Jersey General Assembly 
at Trenton-, New Jersey 1 

February 21, 1861 

MR. SPEAKER AISTD GEisrTLEivEEiNr: I have just enjoyed the honor 
of a reception by the other branch of this Legislature, and I return 
to you and them my thanks for the reception which the people of 
New- Jersey have given, through their chosen representatives, to 
me, as the representative, for the time being, of the majesty of the 
people of the United States. I appropriate to myself very little of 
the demonstrations of respect with which I have been greeted. I 
think little should be given to any man, but that it should be a 
manifestation of adherence to the Union and the Constitution. I 
understand myself to be received here by the representatives of 
the people of New- Jersey, a majority of whom differ in opinion 
from those with whom I have acted. This manifestation is there- 
fore to be regarded by me as expressing their devotion to the 

[236] 



FEBRUARY 21, l86l 

Union, the Constitution and the liberties of the people. You, Mr. 
Speaker, have -well said that this is a time when the bravest and 
wisest look with doubt and awe upon the aspect presented by our 
national affairs. Under these circumstances, you will readily see 
why I should not speak in detail of the course I shall deem it best 
to pursue. It is proper that I should avail myself of all the informa- 
tion and all the time at my command, in order that when the time 
arrives in which I must speak officially, I shall be able to take the 
ground which I deem the best and safest, and from which I may 
have no occasion to swerve. I shall endeavor to take the ground I 
deem most just to the North, the East, the West, the South, and the 
whole country. I take it, I hope, in good temper certainly no 
malice toward any section. I shall do all that may be in my power 
to promote a peaceful settlement of all our difficulties. The man. 
does not live who is more devoted to peace than I am. [Cheers.] 
None who would do more to preserve it. But it may be necessary 
to put the foot down firmly. [Here the audience broke out into 
cheers so loud and long that for some moments it was impossible 
to hear Mr. L.'s voice.] He continued: And if I do my duty, and 
do right, you "will sustain me, will you not? [Loud cheers, and 
cries of "Yes," "Yes," "We will."] Received, as I am, by the mem- 
bers of a Legislature the majority of whom do not agree with me 
in political sentiments, I trust that I may have their assistance in 
piloting the ship of State through this voyage, surrounded by perils 
as it is; for, if it should suffer attack now', there will be no pilot 
ever needed for another voyage. 

Gentlemen, I have already spoken longer than I intended, and 
must beg leave to stop here. 

1 New York Tribune, February 22, 1861. 



Remarks at Trenton House, 
Trenton, New Jersey 1 

February 21, 1861 

I have been invited by your representatives to the Legislature, 
to visit this, the capital of your honored State, and in acknowledg- 
ing their kind invitation, compelled to respond to the welcome of 
the presiding officers of each body, and I suppose they intended I 
should speak to you through them, as they are the representatives 
of all of you; and if I was to speak again here, I should only have 
to repeat in a great measure much that I have said, which would 

[237] 



FEBRUARY 21, l86l 

be disgusting to my friends around me who have met here. I have 
no speech to make ["that's right"], but merely appear to see you 
and let you look at me; and as to the latter, I think I have greatly 
the best of the bargain. [Laughter.] My friends, allow me to bid 
you farewell. 

1 New York Tribune and World, February 22, 1861. The texts are similar. 

Reply to Mayor Alexander Henry 
at Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 1 

February 21, 1861 

Mr. Mayor and Fellow Citizens of Philadelphia I appear be- 
fore you to make no lengthy speech. I appear before you to thank 
you for the reception. The reception you have given me to-night is 
not to ixie., the man, the individual, but to the man who tempora- 
rily represents^ or should represent, the majesty of the nation. (Ap- 
plause.) It is true, as your worthy Mayor has said, that there is 
great anxiety amongst the citizens of the United States at this time. 
I say I deem it a happy circumstance that the dissatisfied portion 
of our fellow citizens do not point us to anything in which they 
are being injured, or about to be injured, from which I have felt 
all the while justified in concluding that the crisis, the panic, the 
anxiety of the country at this time is artificial. If there be those 
who differ with me upon this subject, they have not pointed out the 
substantial difficulty that exists. (Tremendous cheering.) 

I do not mean to say that this artificial panic has not done 
harm. That it has done much harm I do not deny. The hope that 
has been expressed by your worthy Mayor, that I may be able to 
restore peace and harmony and prosperity to the country, is most 
worthy in him; and most happy indeed shall I be if I shall be able 
to fulfill and verify that hope. (Cheers.) 

I promise you in all sincerity, that I bring to the work a sincere 
heart. Whether I will bring a head equal to that heart, will be 
for future time to determine. It were useless for me to speak of the 
details of the plans now. I shall speak officially on next Monday 
week, if ever. If I should not speak, then it were useless for me 
to do so now. [If I do speak, then it is useless for me to do so now.] 2 
When I do speak, as your worthy Mayor has expressed the hope, I 
will take such grounds as I shall deem best calculated to restore 
peace, harmony and prosperity to the country, and tend to the 
perpetuity of the nation, and the liberty of these States and all 
these people. (Applause.) 

[238] 



FEBRUARY 21, l86l 

Your worthy Mayor has expressed the wish, in which I join 
with him, that if it were convenient for me to remain with you in 
your city long enough to consult, [your merchants and manufac- 
turers;] 3 or, as it were, to listen to those breathings rising within 
the consecrated walls where the Constitution of the United States, 
and, I will add, the Declaration of American Independence was 
originally framed, I "would do so. 

I assure you and your Mayor that I had hoped on this occasion, 
and upon all occasions during my life, that I shall do nothing 
inconsistent with the teachings of those holy and most sacred 
-walls. 

I have never asked anything that does not breathe from those 
walls. All my political warfare has been in favor of the teachings 
coming forth from that sacred hall. May my right hand forget its 
cunning and my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if ever I 
prove false to those teachings. 

Fellow citizens, I have addressed you longer than I expected to 
do, and allow me now to bid you good night. 

1 Philadelphia Inquirer? February 22, 1861. The New York Tribune and 
other papers give similar texts. Lincoln spoke from the balcony of the Continen- 
tal Hotel upon arrival. 

2 Bracketed words are in the New York Tribune but not in the Inquirer. 

3 Bracketed words are in the New York Tribune and World but not in the 
Inquirer. 



Reply to a Delegation from 
Wilmington, Delaware 1 

February 21, 1861 

Mr. CHCAiniycArsr: I feel highly flattered by the encomiums you 
have seen fit to bestow upon me. Soon after the nomination of 
Gen. TAYLOR I attended a political meeting in the city of Wilming- 
ton, and have since carried with me a fond remembrance of the hos- 
pitalities of the city on that occasion. 2 The programme established 
provides for my presence in Harrisburg in twenty-four hours from 
this time. 

I expect to be in Washington on Saturday. It is, therefore, an 
impossibility that I should accept your kind invitation. There are 
no people whom I would more gladly accommodate than those of 
Delaware; but circumstances forbid, gentlemen. With many re- 
grets for the character of the reply I am compelled to give you, I 
bid you adieu. 

[239] 



FEBRUARY 22, l86l 

l Philadelphia Inquirer, February 22, 1861. Lincoln replied to a speech of 
invitation by William S. McCaulley, chairman of the delegation from Wil- 
mington, in the reception parlor of the Continental Hotel. This speech has ap- 
peared in other editions (Lapsley) of Lincoln's works, incorrectly dated Febru- 
ary 22. 2 See June 10, 1848, supra. 



Speech in Independence Hall, 
Philadelphia., Pennsylvania 1 

February 22, 1861 

Mr. CUTLER: I am filled with deep emotion at finding myself 
standing here in the place where were collected together the wis- 
dom, the patriotism, the devotion to principle, from which sprang 
the institutions under which we live. You have kindly suggested 
to me that in my hands is the task of restoring peace to our dis- 
tracted country. I can say in return, sir, that all the political sen- 
timents I entertain have been drawn, so far as I have been able to 
draw them, from the sentiments which originated, and were given 
to the world from this hall in which we stand. I have never had 
a feeling politically that did not spring from the sentiments em- 
bodied in the Declaration of Independence. (Great cheering.) I 
have often pondered over the dangers which were incurred by the 
men who assembled here and adopted 2 that Declaration of Inde- 
pendence I have pondered over the toils that were endured by 
the officers and soldiers of the army, who achieved that Independ- 
ence. (Applause.) I have often inquired pf myself, what great 
principle or idea it was that kept this Confederacy so long together. 
It was not the mere matter of the separation of the colonies from 
the mother land; but something in that Declaration giving liberty, 3 
not alone to the people of this country, but hope to the world for 
all future time. (Great applause.) It was that which gave promise 
that in due time the weights should be lifted from the shoulders 
of all men, and that all should have an equal chance. (Cheers.) 
This is the sentiment embodied in that Declaration of Independ- 
ence. 

Now, my friends, can this country be saved upon that basis? If 
it can, I will consider myself one of the happiest men in the world 
if I can help to save it. If it can't be saved upon that principle, it 
will be truly awful. But, if this country cannot be saved without 
giving up that principle I was about to say I would rather be 
assassinated on this spot than to surrender it, 4 (Applause.) 

Now, in my view of the present aspect of affairs, there is no 
need of bloodshed and war. There is no necessity for it. I am not 

[240] 



FEBRUARY 22, l86l 

in favor of such a course, and I may say in advance, there will be 
no blood shed unless it be forced upon the Government. The Gov- 
ernment will not use force unless force is used against it. 5 (Pro- 
longed applause and cries of "That's the proper sentiment.") 

My friends, this is a wholly unprepared speech. I did not expect 
to be called upon to say a word when I came here I supposed I 
was merely to do something towards raising a flag. I may, there- 
fore, have said something indiscreet, (cries of "no, no"), but I 
have said nothing but what I am willing to live by, and, in 6 the 
pleasure of Almighty God, die by. 

1 Philadelphia Inquirer., February 23, 1861. Important variations of the text 
in the New York Tribune are given in footnotes. Lincoln was welcomed by 
Theodore L. Cuyler, president of the Select Council of Philadelphia. 

2 New York Tribune reads, "and framed and adopted." 

3 Tribune reads, "but that sentiment in the Declaration of Independence 
which gave liberty." 

4 Lincoln's allusion may have been suggested by the warning which he had 
received of a plot to assassinate him, when the presidential train passed through 
Baltimore. 

5 Tribune reads in place of this sentence, ". . . , and then it -will be compelled 
to act in self-defense." 6 Tribune reads, "and if it be the pleasure." 

Speech at the Flag-raising before 
Independence Hall, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 1 

February 22, 1861 

FELLOW CITIZENS: I am invited and called before you to par- 
ticipate in raising above Independence Hall the flag of our country, 
with an additional star upon it. (Cheers.) I propose now, in ad- 
vance of performing this very pleasant and complimentary duty, 
to say a few words. I propose to say that when that flag "was origi- 
nally raised here it had but thirteen stars. I wish to call your atten- 
tion to the fact, that, under the blessing of God, each additional star 
added to that flag has given additional prosperity and happiness to 
this country until it has advanced to its present condition; and its 
welfare in the future, as well as in the past, is in your hands. 
(Cheers.) Cultivating the spirit that animated our fathers, who 
gave renown and celebrity to this Hall, cherishing that fraternal 
feeling which has so long characterized us as a nation, excluding 
passion, ill-temper and precipitate action on all occasions, I think 
we may promise ourselves that not only the new star placed upon 
that flag shall be permitted to remain there to our permanent pros- 
perity for years to come, but additional ones shall from time to 
time be placed there, until we shall number as was anticipated by 

[241] 



FEBRUARY 22, l86l 

the great historian, five hundred millions of happy and prosperous 
people. (Great applause.) With these few remarks, I proceed to 
the very agreeable duty assigned me. 

l Philadelphia Inquirer, February 23, 1861. Immediately following the 
speech in Independence Hall, Lincoln was accompanied to a platform outside 
where he was introduced to the assembled crowd by Stephen Benton, chairman 
of the Committee on City Property, in charge of the ceremonies. The new flag 
contained thirty-four stars, the thirty-fourth representing Kansas, admitted into 
the Union on January 29, 1861. 



Remarks at Leaman Place., Pennsylvania 1 

February 22, 1861 

Mr. Lincoln appeared and said he was too unwell to say much 
to them. He expressed his pleasure on entering the great county of 
Lancaster, and thanked them for their friendly greeting, conclud- 
ing by saying that he had merely come out to see them and let 
them see him, in which he thought he had the best of the bargain! 
To this the crowd responded "no you haven't!" 

Loud calls being made for Mrs. Lincoln, Mr. L. brought her out, 
and said he had concluded to give them "the long and the short 
of it!" This remark with the disparity between the length of him- 
self and wife produced a loud burst of laughter, followed by en- 
thusiastic cheers as the train moved off. 

1 Lancaster, Pennsylvania, Evening Express, February 22, 1861. 



Remarks at Lancaster, Pennsylvania 1 

February 22, 1861 

LADIES AND GEISTTLEMEKT OF OLD LANCASTER: I appear not to 
make a speech. I have not time to make them at length, and not 
strength to make them on every occasion, and, worse than all, I 
have none to make. I come before you to see and be seen and, 
as regards the ladies, I have the best of the bargain; but, as to the 
gentlemen, I cannot say as much. There is plenty of matter to 
speak about in these times, but it is well known that the more a 
man speaks the less he is understood the more he says one thing, 
his adversaries contend he meant something else. I shall soon have 
occasion to speak officially, and then I will endeavor to put my 
thoughts just as plain as I can express myself, true to the Consti- 
tution and Union of all the States, and to the perpetual liberty 
of all the people. Until I so speak, there is no need to enter upon 

[242] 



FEBRUARY 22, l86l 

details. In conclusion, I greet you most heartily, and "bid you an 
affectionate farewell. 

1 New York Tribune and Times > February 23, 1861. Other versions are sub- 
stantially the same. 

Reply to Governor Andre w J. Curtin 
at Harrisbiirg, Pennsylvania 1 

February 22, 1861 

Gov. Curtin and citizens of the State of Pennsylvania: Perhaps 
the best thing that I could do would be simply to endorse the pa- 
triotic and eloquent speech which your Governor has just made 
in your hearing. [Applause.] I am quite sure that I am unable 
to address to you anything so appropriate as that which he has 
uttered. 

Reference has been made by him to the distraction of the pub- 
lic mind at this time and to the great task that lies before me in 
entering upon the administration of the General Government. 
With all the eloquence and ability that your Governor brings to 
this theme, I am quite sure he does not in his situation he can- 
not appreciate as I do the weight of that great responsibility. I 
feel that, under God, in the strength of the arms and wisdom of 
the heads of these masses, after all, must be my support. [Immense 
cheering.] As I have often had occasion to say, I repeat to you 
I am quite sure I do not deceive myself when I tell you I bring to 
the work an honest heart; I dare not tell you that I bring a head 
sufficient for it. [A voice "we are sure of that."] If my own 
strength should fail, I shall at least fall back upon these masses, 
who, I think, under any circumstances will not fail. 

Allusion has been made to the peaceful principles upon which 
this great Commonwealth was originally settled. Allow me to add 
my meed of praise to those peaceful principles. I hope no one of 
the Friends who originally settled here, or who lived here since 
that time, or who live here now, has been or is a more devoted 
lover of peace, harmony and concord than my humble self. 

While I have been proud to see to-day the finest military array, 
I think, that I have ever seen, allow me to say in regard to those 
men that they give hope of what may be done when war is inevi- 
table. But, at the same time, allow- me to express the hope that in 
the shedding of blood their services may never be needed, espe- 
cially in the shedding of fraternal blood. It shall be my endeavor 
to preserve the peace of this country so far as it can possibly be 
done, consistently with the maintenance of the institutions of the 

[243] 



FEBRUARY 22, l86l 

country. With my consent, or without my great displeasure, this 
country shall never witness the shedding of one drop of blood in 
fraternal strife. 

And now, my fellow-citizens, as I have made many speeches, 
will you allow me to bid you farewell? 

* Harrisburg, Pennsylvania Daily Telegraph., February 22, 1861. Variant 
texts in New York Tribune and New York Times., February 23, 1861. Lincoln 
spoke from the balcony of the Jones House. 

Address to the Pennsylvania General Assembly 

at Harrisburg 1 

February 22, 1861 

Mr. Speaker of the Senate and also Mr. Speaker of the House 
of Representatives, and Gentlemen of the General Assembly of the 
State of Pennsylvania., I appear before you only for a very few 
brief remarks in response to what has been said to me. I thank you 
most sincerely for this reception, and the generous words in which 
support has been promised me upon this occasion. I thank your 
great Commonwealth for the overwhelming support it recently 
gave not me personally but the cause which I think a just one, 
in the late election. [Loud applause.] 

Allusion has been made to the fact the interesting fact perhaps 
we should say that I for the first time appear at the Capitol of 
the great Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, upon the birthday of 
the Father of his Country. In connection with that beloved anni- 
versary connected with the history of this country, I have already 
gone through one exceedingly interesting scene this morning in the 
ceremonies at Philadelphia. Under the kind conduct of gentlemen 
there, I was for the first time allowed the privilege of standing in 
old Independence Hall, [enthusiastic cheering], to have a few 
words addressed to me there and opening up to me an opportunity 
of expressing with much regret that I had not more time to express 
something of my own feelings excited by the occasion somewhat 
to harmonize and give shape to the feelings that had been really 
the feelings of my whole life. 

Besides this, our friends there had provided a magnificent flag 
of the country. They had arranged it so that I was given the honor 
of raising it to the head of its staff [applause] ; and when it went 
up, I was pleased that it went to its place by the strength of my 
own feeble arm. When, according to the arrangement, the cord was 
pulled and it flaunted gloriously to the wind without an accident, 
in the light [bright] 2 glowing sun-shine of the morning, I could 

[244] 



FEBRUARY 22, 86l 

not help hoping that there was in the entire success of that beauti- 
ful ceremony, at least something of an omen of what is to come. 
[Loud applause.] Nor could I help, feeling then as I often have 
felt, that in the whole of that proceeding I was a very humble in- 
strument. I had not provided the flag; I had not made the arrange- 
ment for elevating it to its place; I had applied but a very small 
portion of even my feeble strength in raising it. In the whole trans- 
action, I was in the hands of the people who had arranged it, and 
if I can have the same generous co-operation of the people of this 
nation, I think the flag of our country may yet be kept flaunting 
gloriously. [Enthusiastic, long continued cheering.] 

I recur for a moment but to repeat some words uttered at the 
hotel in regard to what has been said about the military support 
which the general government may expect from the Common- 
wealth of Pennsylvania, in a proper emergency. To guard against 
any possible mistake do I recur to this. It is not with any pleasure 
that I contemplate the possibility that a necessity may arise in this 
country for the use of the military arm. [Applause.] While I am 
exceedingly gratified to see the manifestation upon your streets of 
your military force here, and exceedingly gratified at your prom- 
ise here to use that force upon a proper emergency, while I make 
these acknowledgments, I desire to repeat, in order to preclude any 
possible misconstruction, that I do most sincerely hope that we 
shall have no use for them [loud applause] that it will never 
become their duty to shed blood, and most especially never to shed 
fraternal blood. I promise that, (in so far as I may have wisdom to 
direct,) if so painful a result shall in any wise be brought about, 
it shall be through no fault of mine. [Cheers.] 

Allusion has also been made, by one of your honored Speakers, 
to some remarks recently made by myself at Pittsburgh, in regard 
to what is supposed to be the especial interest of this great Com- 
monwealth of Pennsylvania. I now wish only to say, in regard to 
that matter, that the f ew remarks which I uttered on that occasion 
were rather carefully worded, I took pains that they should be so. 
I have seen no occasion since to add to them or subtract from them. 
I leave them precisely as they stand; [applause] adding only now 
that I am pleased to have an expression from you, gentlemen of 
Pennsylvania, significant that they are satisfactory to you. 

And now, gentlemen of the General Assembly of the Common- 
wealth of Pennsylvania, allow me again to return to you my most 
sincere thanks. 

[Mr. Lincoln took his seat amid rapturous and prolonged cheer- 
ing.] 

[245] 



FEBRUARY 26, 1 8 6 1 

lHarrisburg, Pennsylvania Daily Telegraph, February 22, 1861. Variant 
texts in New York Tribune and New York Times., February 23, 1861. 
2 "Bright" appears in Tribune. 

Reply to Committee of Congress Reporting 
the Electoral Count 1 

February 26, 1861 

With deep gratitude to my countrymen for this mark of their 
confidence; with a distrust of my own ability to perform the re- 
quired duty under the most favorable circumstances, now rendered 
doubly difficult by existing national perils; yet with a firm reliance 
on the strength of our free government, and the ultimate loyalty 
of the people to the just principles upon which it is founded, and 
above all an unshaken faith in the Supreme Ruler of nations, I 
accept this trust. Be pleased to signify my acceptance to the respec- 
tive Houses of Congress. 

1 Copy, DLC-RTL. The copy is in Nicolay's handwriting, but bears the in- 
correct date "Feb. 9, 1864" in another hand. There is also in the Lincoln Papers 
a rough copy or draft in another hand, which may be the transcript made at 
the time of Lincoln's reply, and revised by Nicolay for the press. The text 
in the New York Herald, February 27, 1861, ^is verbally the same. 

Reply to Mayor James G. Berret 
at Washington, D.C. 1 

February 27, 1861 

Mr. MAYOR I thank you, and through you the municipal au- 
thorities of this city by whom you are accompanied for this wel- 
come; and as it is the first time in my life, since the present phase 
of politics has presented itself in this country, that I have said any- 
thing publicly within a region of country where the institution of 
slavery exists, I will take this occasion to say, that I think very 
much of the ill feeling that has existed and still exists between the 
people of the section from whence I came and the people here, is 
owing to a misunderstanding bet-ween each other which unhappily 
prevails. I therefore avail myself of this opportunity to assure you, 
Mr. Mayor, and all the gentlemen present, that I have not now, 
and never have had, any other than as kindly feelings towards you 
as to the people of my own section. I have not now, and never have 
had, any disposition to treat you in any respect otherwise than as 
my own neighbors. I have not now any purpose to withhold from 
you any of the benefits of the constitution, under any circum- 
stances, that I would not feel myself constrained to withhold from 
my own neighbors; and I hope, in a word, when we shall become 

[246] 



FKBRUARY 28, l86l 

better acquainted and I say it with great confidence we shall 
like each other the more. Again I thank you for the kindness of this 
reception. 

1 New York Herald, February 28, 1861 Mayor Berret and the Common 
Council of Washington visited President Buchanan at the White House and 
then called to welcome President-elect Lincoln at Willard's Hotel. 

Response to a Serenade 1 

February 28, 1861 

MY FRIENDS I suppose that I may take this as a compliment 
paid to me, and as such please accept my thanks for it. I have 
reached this city of Washington under circumstances considerably 
differing from those under which any other man has ever reached 
it. I have reached it for the purpose of taking an official position 
amongst the people, almost all of whom were opposed to me, and 
are yet opposed to me, as I suppose. (Several voices, "No, no." 
Other voices "Go on, sir; you are mistaken in that, indeed you 
are.") I propose no lengthy address to you now. I only propose to 
say, as I did say on yesterday, I believe, when your worthy Mayor 
and Board of Aldermen called upon me, that I thought much of the 
ill feeling that has existed between you and the people of your sur- 
roundings and that people from amongst whom I come, has de- 
pended, and now depends, upon a misunderstanding. (Several 
voices "That's so;" and applause.) I hope that if things shall go 
along as prosperously as I believe we all desire they may, I may 
have it in my power to remove something of this misunderstand- 
ing (cries of "Good," "Good," and loud applause) that I may 
be enabled to convince you, and the people of your section of the 
country, that we regard you as in all things being our equals in 
all things entitled to the same respect and to the same treatment 
that we claim for ourselves (cries of "Good," and applause) 
that we are in no wise disposed, if it were in our power, to oppress 
you or deprive you of any of your rights under the constitution of 
the United States or even narrowly to split hairs with you in re- 
gard to these rights. (Loud and prolonged cheering.) But are deter- 
mined to give you, so far as lies in our hands, all your rights under 
the constitution, not grudgingly, but fully and fairly. (Cries of 
"Good," and applause.) I hope that by thus dealing with you we 
will become better acquainted and be better friends. (Cries of 
"Good," and applause.) And now my friends with these very few 
remarks, I again return my thanks for this compliment, and ex- 
pressing my desire to hear a little more of your good music, I bid 
you good night. 

[247] 



3VEARC3EI, l86l 

iNew York Herald, March i, 1861. The U.S. Marine Band and a great 
crowd had gathered outside Willard's Hotel while President and Mrs. Lincoln 
were holding a levee in the hotel parlors. Lincoln responded to Hail to the 
Chief." 

To Gideon Welles 1 

[March, 1861?] 

Sec. of the Navy, please see Mr. Williams, who can give some in- 
formation about the defences [of Charleston. A. LINCOLN] 

1ALS, owned hy Stephen V. Feeley, Washington, D.C. Mr. "Williams has 
not been identified. The card on which this note is written has heen burned, 
and the date is illegible, but the conclusion and signature are legible in part. 

List of Senators' Preferences for 
Cabinet Appointment 1 



Trumbull- [Lyman B.] 
Anthony [Henry B.] 
Baker [Edward D.] 
Bingham [Kinsley S.] 
Chandler [Zachariah] 
Clark [Daniel] 
Collamer [Jacob] 
Dixon [James] 
Doolittle [James R.] 
Durkee [Charles] 
Fessenden [William P.] 
Foote [Solomon Foot] 
Foster [Lafayette S.] 
Grimes [James W.] 
Hale [John P.] 
Morrell [Lot M. Morrill] 
Harlin [James Harlan] 
King [Preston] 
Simmons [James F.] 
1 AD, DLC-RTL. 



[March i? 1861] 

Chase x 

Simmons 
Cameron 
Chase- 
Cameron 

Chase Simmons x 

Simmons 
Cameron 

Chase Fessenden Sherman- 
Chase 

Chase x 

Dayton x 

Dayton. Against Chase & Cameron x 
Dayton 

Chase x 

Chase 
Chase- 
Chase & Sherman. x 
Chase 



To WiDiam H. Seward 1 

Private 
Hon. W. H. Seward Willard's. Feb. [rfc] March i. 1861 

Dear Sir If a successor to Gen. Twiggs is attempted to be ap- 
pointed, do not allow it to be done. Yours in haste 

A. LriNrcouNr. 

3-ALS, NAtiE. General David E. Twiggs in command of the Depart- 
ment of Texas, disbanded his forces in February, 1861, and accepted a major 
general's commission from Georgia. 

[248] 



First Inaugural Address First Edition 
and Revisions 1 

March 4, 1861 

In 2 compliance with a custom as old as the government itself, I 
appear before you to address you briefly, and to take, in your pres- 
ence, the oath prescribed by the Constitution of the United States, 
to be taken by the President "before he enters on the execution of 
his office." 3 

1 Documents, DLC-RTL. The original manuscript was composed during Jan- 
udry, 1861, but, with the exception noted below (note 2) is presumably not 
extant. It was set in type at the office of the Illinois State Journal and printed 
in eight numbered pages. How many copies were struck off is not known, but 
there are two extant copies in the Lincoln Papers, both labeled "First Edition" 
by Lincoln. One of these copies, which bears no corrections, is herein repro- 
duced. The revisions in Lincoln's hand on the second copy, as well as subsequent 
revisions, by Lincoln, Seward, and Browning, are indicated by means of foot- 
notes. For the final text, see First Inaugural Address Final Text, infra. 

Lincoln must have made further revisions in proof sheets of the First Edi- 
tion before the printing of the Second Edition, for the Second Edition omits 
some paragraphs and shows verbal changes from his corrected First Edition. 
No source of these corrections has been found. 

There are five extant copies of the Second Edition: one copy (in the Lincoln 
Papers) bears further corrections in Lincoln's handwriting, some of which, at 
least, were adopted after Lincoln had studied Seward's suggestions for revision 
in late February; a second copy (in the Henry E. Huntington Library) which 
was given to Orville H. Browning bears his single suggestion for revision; a 
third copy (in the Lincoln Papers) with lines numbered by Seward is accom- 
panied by six pages (including a verso) of Seward's manuscript suggestions for 
revision keyed to the line numbering (footnotes herein show Seward's sug- 
gestions relegated to their appropriate places in text) ; a fourth copy (in the 
Lincoln Papers) bears Nicolay's transcription of Seward's suggestions; and a 
fifth copy was cut up into clippings which were used in the preparation of the 
final text {infra). 

In addition to the clippings from the fifth copy of the second edition, the 
final text (infra) includes passages inserted in Lincoln's handwriting, incorpo- 
rating but not closely following the preceding revisions and suggestions; many 
passages were completely rewritten. Two other copies of this final text were 
made up. One (in the Harvard Library) with Lincoln's rewritten portions 
copied in Nicolay's hand, was prepared by Nicolay for the press; the other 
(owned by Crosby N. Boyd of Washington, D.C.) was prepared by an uniden- 
tified hand specifically for the Washington Star as the earliest paper to go to 
press after the inaugural ceremonies. 

Footnotes 3-99 indicate the revisions which were made or suggested up to the 
draft of the final text. Sources of revisions are indicated as follows: (L-isx) 
indicates Lincoln's revision of the First Edition, and (L-2m>) his revision of 
the second edition; (S-2ND) indicates Seward's suggestions for revision of the 
second edition; and (B-2ND) indicates Browning's one suggestion. 

2 The autograph manuscript of what appears to be an earlier draft of this 
paragraph is as follows: "In compliance with a custom as old as the govern- 
ment, I appear before you to address you briefly, and, in your presence, to take 
the oath prescribed by the Constitution and laws to be taken by whomever 
["enters upon" deleted] assumes to perform the ["discharge*' deleted] duties 
of our national chief magistrate." (DLC-RTL). 

3 (S-2KD) "Omit the inverted commas." 

[249] 



MARCH 4, l86l 

The more modern custom of electing 4 a Chief Magistrate upon 
a previously declared platform 5 of principles, supercedes, in a great 
measure, the necessity of repeating 6 those principles in an inaugu- 
ral address. 7 Upon the plainest grounds of good faith, one so elected 
is not at liberty to shift his position. 8 It is necessarily implied, if not 
expressed, that, in his judgment, the platform which he thus ac- 
cepts, 9 binds him to nothing either unconstitutional or inexpedient. 

Having 10 been so elected upon the Chicago Platform, and while 
I would repeat nothing in it, of aspersion or epithet or question of 
motive against any man or party, I hold myself bound by duty, as 
well as impelled by inclination to follow, within the executive 
sphere, the principles therein declared. By no other course could I 
meet the reasonable expectations of the country. 11 

I do not consider it necessary at present for me to 12 say more 
than I have, in relation to those matters of administration, about 
which there is no special excitement. 

Apprehension seems to exist among the people of the Southern 
States, that by the accession of a Republican Administration, their 
property, and their peace, and personal security, are to be endan- 
gered. There has never been any reasonable cause for such appre- 
hension. Indeed, the most ample evidence to the contrary has all 
the while existed, and been open to their inspection. It is found in 
nearly all the published speeches of him who now addresses you. 
I do but quote from one of those speeches when I declare that "I 
have no purpose, directly or indirectly, to interfere with the insti- 
tution of slavery in the States where it exists. I believe I have no 
lawful right to do so, and I have no inclination to do so." Those 
who nominated and elected me did so with full knowledge that I 
had made this and many other similar declarations, and had never 
recanted them. And more than this, they placed in the platform, 
for my acceptance, and as a law to themselves, and to me, the clear 
and emphatic resolution which I now read: 

4 (S-2ND) "Instead of [*] electing ['] write 'nominating.'" 

5 (S-2ND) "Instead of [*lplatform[*] write 'summary.*'* 

6 (L-isT) "Repeating" deleted, "re-stating" inserted. 

7 (L-isT) "Inaugural" deleted, "of this character" inserted following "ad- 
dress." 

8 (S-2ND) "Strike out all between 'Upon* and 'position* both included." 

9 (S-23NTD) "After the word 'that* strike out 'in his judgment the platform 
which he thus accepts [*] and insert ['] the summary binds the officer elected. ['1 " 

10 (S-23sno) "Strike out all these lines [paragraph beginning with "Having"] 
and write t With this explanation I deem it my duty as I am disposed in feeling 
to follow so far as they apply to the Executive sphere the principles on which I 
was brought before the American People,' " 

11 (L-aixxO Paragraphs two and three are marked for deletion. 

12 (L.-2ND) "Say more than I have, in relation to" deleted, "discuss" inserted. 

[250] 



MARCH 4, l86l 

"Resolved, That the maintenance inviolate of the rights of the 
States, and especially the right of each State to order and control 
its own domestic institutions according to its own judgment exclu- 
sively, is essential to that balance of power on which the perfection 
and endurance of our political fabric depend; and we denounce the 
lawless invasion by armed force of the soil of any State or Ter- 
ritory, no matter under what pretext, as among the gravest of 
crimes." 

I now reiterate these sentiments: and in doing so, I only press 
upon the public attention the most conclusive evidence of which 
the case is susceptible, that the property, peace and security of no 
section are to be in anywise endangered by the now incoming Ad- 
ministration. I add too, that all the protection which, consistently 
with the Constitution and the laws, can be given, will be cheerfully 
given 13 to all the States as cheerfully to one section as to another. 

There is much controversy about the delivering up of fugitives 
from service or labor. The clause I now read is as plainly written 
in the Constitution as any other of its provisions: 

"No person held to service or labor in one State, under the law's 
thereof, escaping into another, shall, in consequence of any law or 
regulation therein, be discharged from such service or labor, but 
shall be delivered up on claim of the party to whom such service 
or labor may be due." 

It is scarcely questioned that this provision -was intended by 
those who made it, for the reclaiming of what we call fugitive 
slaves; and the intention of the law-giver is the law. All members 
of Congress swear their support to the whole Constitution to this 
provision as much as to any other. To the proposition, then, that 
slaves whose cases come within the terms of this clause, "shall be 
delivered up," their oaths are unanimous. Now, if they would all 
begin 14 in good temper, could they not, with something like 15 
nearly equal unanimity, frame and pass a law, 16 through which to 
keep good that unanimous oath? 

There is some difference of opinion whether this clause should 
be enforced by national or by state authority; but surely that dif- 
ference is not a very material one. If the slave is to be surrendered, 
it can be of but little consequence to him, or to others, by which 
authority it is done. And should any one, in any case, be content 

13 (S-23NTD) "After the -words 'cheerfully given* insert 'in every case and 
under all circumstances/ " 

(Lr-arro) "When lawfully demanded, for whatever cause" inserted, 
i* (L-isx) "All begin" deleted, "make the effort" inserted, 
is (L-isx) "Something like" deleted. 
16 (L-iST) "Through" deleted, "by means of" inserted. 

[251] 



MARCH 4, l86l 

that his oath shall go unkept, on a merely unsubstantial contro- 
versy as to hoiv it shall be kept? 

Again, in any law upon this subject, ought not all the safeguards 
of liberty known in human and 17 civilized jurisprudence to be in- 
troduced, so that a free man be not, in any case, surrendered as a 
slave? 

I take the official oath to-day, with no mental reservations, and 
with no purpose to construe the Constitution or laws, by any hyper- 
critical rules. And while I do not think proper 18 now to specify 
particular acts of Congress as proper to be enforced, I do suggest 
that it will be much safer for all, both in official and private sta- 
tions, to conform to and abide by all those acts which stand unre- 
pealed, than to violate any of them, trusting to find impunity in 
having them held to be unconstitutional. 

It is now 19 seventy-two years since the first inauguration of a 
President under our national Constitution. During the 20 period be- 
tween then and now, 21 fifteen different and greatly distinguished 
citizens, have in succession, administered the executive branch of 
the government. They have conducted it through many perils; and, 
on the whole, 22 with great success. Yet, with all this scope for 
precedent, I now enter upon the same task for the brief constitu- 
tional term of four years, under great and peculiar difficulty. A 
disruption of the Federal Union 23 is menaced, and, so far as can 
be on paper, is already effected. The particulars of what has been 
done are so familiar and so fresh, that I need 24 to waste no 25 time 
in recounting them. 

I hold, that in contemplation of universal law, and of the Con- 
stitution, the Union of these States is perpetual. Perpetuity is im- 
plied, if not expressed, in the fundamental law of all national gov- 
ernments. It is safe to assert that no government proper, ever had 
a provision in its organic law for its own termination. Continue to 
execute all the express provisions of our national Constitution, and 
the Union will endure forever it being impossible to destroy it, 
except by some action not provided for in the instrument itself. 

17 (L-isT) "Human and" deleted, "and humane" inserted after "civilized." 

18 (L-2ND) "Think proper" deleted, "choose" inserted. 
* 9 (S-2ND) "Strike out 'now.' " 

(L-aisrD) Deletion adopted. 

20 (L-IST) "The" deleted, "that" inserted. 

21 (Lr-isT) "Between then and now" deleted. 

22 (S-2ND) "Strike out *on the whole* and write 'generally.* " 
(L-23STD) Substitution adopted. 

23 (S-2ND) "After the word 'Union* strike out the rest of the sentence, and 
insert, 'heretofore only menaced is now formidably attempted." " 

24 (L-isT) "Not" inserted. 2 ^ (L-isx) "No" deleted, "any" inserted. 

[252] 



MARCH 4, l86l 

Again, if the United States be not a government proper, but an 
association of States in the nature of contract merely, can it, as a 
contract, be peaceably unmade, by less than all the parties who 
made it? One party to a contract may violate it break it, so to 
speak; but does it not require all to 26 rescind it? 

Descending from these general principles, we find the proposi- 
tion that, in legal contemplation, the Union is perpetual, confirmed 
by the history of the Union itself. The Union is much older than 
the Constitution. It was formed in fact, by the Articles of Associa- 
tion in 1774. It was matured and continued by the Declaration of 
Independence in 1776. It was further matured and expressly de- 
clared and pledged, 27 to be perpetual, by the Articles of Confedera- 
tion in 1778. And finally, in 1787, one of the declared objects for 
ordaining and establishing the Constitution, was cc to form a more 
perfect union." 

But if destruction of the Union, by one, or by a part only, of the 
States, be lawfully possible, the Union is less perfect than before, 
which 28 contradicts the Constitution, and therefore is absurd. 29 

It f ollows from these views that no State, upon its own mere mo- 
tion, can lawfully get out of the Union, that resolves and ordi- 
nances to that effect are legally nothing; 30 and that acts of violence, 
within any State or States, 31 are insurrectionary or treasonable, 32 
according to circumstances. 

I therefore consider that 33 the Union is unbroken; and, to the 
extent of my ability, I shall take care 34 that the laws of the Union 
be faithfully executed in all the States. Doing this I deem to be 
only a simple duty on my part; and I shall perform it, 35 unless my 
rightful masters, the American people, shall withhold the requisite 
means, or, in some tangible way, 36 direct the contrary. I trust this 
will not be regarded as a menace, but only as the declared purpose 

26 (X-isT) "Lawfully" inserted. 

2T (L-23NTD) "And pledged" deleted, "plighted, and engaged," inserted. 

28 (L-23NTD) "Which contradicts the" deleted [deletion of "the" was ohvi- 
ously unintentional] , "and therefore is absurd" deleted, "having lost the vital 
element of perpetuity" inserted. 

29 (S-2ND) "Strike out the whole line [.<=?., "therefore is absurd."]." 

3 (S-2m>) "For 'nothing* write Void.' " (L-arro) Substitution adopted. 

31 (L-isx) "Against the [deletion] authority, of the United States" inserted. 

32 (S-2ND) "For ['] treasonable, ['] write 'revolutionary,'" 
(L-23Nn>) Substitution adopted. 

33 (S-2iST>) "After the word 'that* write [*]in the view of the constitution 
and the laws. [']" (L.-23NTD) Insertion adopted. 

34 (5-21*0) "After the word [']care['] insert 'as the constitution itself ex- 
pressly enjoins upon me.[*]" (L-2PTD) Insertion adopted. 

35 (L-IST) "So far as practicable" inserted. 

36 (S-20STD) "Instead of 'tangible way* write 'authoritative manner. [*]" 
(L.-2Kro) Substitution adopted. 

[253] 



MARCH 4, l86l 

of the Union that it will 37 have its own, and defend itself. 38 
In doing this there needs to be no bloodshed or violence; and 
there shall be none, unless 39 forced upon the national authority. 
All 40 the power at my disposal will be used to reclaim 41 the public 
property and places which have fallen; to hold, occupy and pos- 
sess these, 42 and all other property and places belonging to the gov- 
ernment, and to collect the duties on imports; 43 but beyond what 
may be necessary for these, 44 there will be no invasion of any 

State. 45 

37 (L-IST) "Will" and "defend" underlined. 

38 (S-2ND) "Instead of 'will have its own, and defend itself* write [']will 
constitutionally defend and maintain itself.' " 39 (L-isr) "It be" inserted. 

4 (S-2isrD) "Strike out the whole [sentence] and insert, 'The power confided 
to me shall be used indeed with efficacy but also with discretion in every case 
and exigency according to the circumstances actually existing and with a view 
and a hope of a peaceful solution of the national troubles and the restoration of 
fraternal sympathies and affections. [']" 

41 (B-2KTD) Orville H. Browning suggested revision of this sentence to omit 
"to reclaim the public property and places which have fallen" and to continue 
". . . to hold, occupy and possess the property and places belonging to the gov- 
ernment. . . ." (L-23sr>) Deletion adopted. 

Browning to Lincoln February 17, 1861, explained that "On principle the 
passage is right as it now stands. The fallen places ought to be reclaimed. But 
cannot that be accomplished as well, or even better without announcing the 
purpose in your inaugural?" (DLC-BTL). On the back of Browning's letter 
Lincoln wrote the following sentence, probably as a tentative insertion to be 
made in the Address: "Americans, all, we are not enemies, but friends. "We 
have sacred ties of affection which, though strained by passion, let us hope can 
never be broken." (DLC-RTL). Part of this phrasing went into Lincoln's con- 
cluding paragraph added to the final copy following Seward's suggestion. See 
note 99 and compare Lincoln's last paragraph in the final text infra. 

42 (L-2ND) "These" changed to "the," "and all other" deleted. 

4 3 (L-IST) "Imports" deleted, "imposts" inserted. 

44 (L-isT) "Objects" inserted. 

45 (L-23STD) "State" deleted, "part of the country no using of force against, 
or among the people" inserted. 

(L-IST) Passages inserted as follows: "Where hostility to the government 
[United States], in any interior locality shall be so great and so universal, as 
to forbid [prevent] competent citizens of their own, to hold, and exercise [resi- 
dent citizens from holding] the federal offices, there will be no attempt to force 
obnoxious strangers among them [the people] for that object. While the strict 
legal right, may exist in the government to enforce the exercise of the [these] 
offices under such circumstances, ["under . . . circumstances" deleted] the at- 
tempt [to do so] would be so irritating, and so nearly impracticable, with all, 
that I deem it better to forego, for the time, the uses of such offices." Bracketed 
variants represent further changes which appear in the second edition as finally 
struck off. 

(S-21NTD) "Strike out the whole sentence [i.e., Lincoln's insertion actually 
including two sentences] and insert 'There are in this government as in every 
other emergencies when the exercise of power lawful in itself is less certain to 
secure the just ends of administration, than a temporary forbearance from it 
with reliance on the voluntary though delayed acquiescence of the people in 
the laws which have been made by themselves and for their own benefit. I 
shall not lose sight of this obvious maxim.* ** Suggestion not adopted. 

[254] 



MARCH 4, l86l 

The mails, unless refused, will continue to be furnished in all 
parts of the Union. So far as possible, the people everywhere shall 
have that sense of perfect security which is most favorable to calm 
thought and reflection. 46 

That there are persons 47 who seek to destroy the Union at all 
events, and are glad of any pretext to do it, I will neither affirm or 
deny; but if there be such, I need address no word to them. 48 To 
those, however, who really love the Union, may I not speak? 

Before entering upon so grave a matter as the destruction of our 
national Union, 49 would it not be wise to ascertain precisely why 
we do it? Will you hazard so desperate a step, while there is any 
possibility that any portion of the ills you fly from have no real 
existence? Will you while the certain ills you fly to, are greater 
than all the real ones you fly from? Will you risk the commission 
of so fearful a mistake? 

All profess to be content in the Union, if all constitutional rights 
can be maintained. Is it true, then, that any 50 right, plainly writ- 
ten in the Constitution, has been denied? I think not. Happily the 
human mind is so constructed, that no party can reach to the au- 
dacity of doing this. Think, if you can, of a single instance in 
which a plainly written provision of the Constitution has ever been 
denied. If, by the mere force of numbers, a majority should de- 
prive a minority of any clearly written constitutional right, it 
might, in a moral point of view, justify revolution certainly 
would, if such right were a vital one; 51 but such is not our case. 
All the vital rights of minorities, and of individuals, are so plainly 
assured to them, by affirmations and negations 52 in the Consti- 
tution, that controversies never arise concerning them. But no 
organic law can ever be framed with a provision specifically ap- 
plicable to every 53 question which may occur in practical admin- 

46 (L-iST) "This course will be pursued, unless current experience shall show 
a modification, or change to "be proper'* inserted. 

47 (S-am>) "After the word ['] persons ['] insert 'in one section as 'well as in 
the other.* " (L-aasro) "Either North or South" inserted. 

48 (S-23NTD) "After the 'word 'them' insert 'because I am sure they must be 
few in number and of little influence when their pernicious principles are fully 
understood. ['] " 

4 (Lr-isx) "Union" deleted, "fabric" inserted. 

(Lr-aisno) "Union" deleted, and "fabric, with all its benefits, it's memories, 
and it's hopes," inserted. 

50 (S-23NTD) "After the word 'any* write 'distinct.* " 

51 (L-isT) Punctuation changed to period and "but" capitalized. 

52 (S-23STD) "After the word 'negations' "write ['] guarantees and prohibi- 
tions. [*]" (L-23sn>) Insertion adopted. 

5 3 (S-SND) "After the word 'every* write 'possible.* " 
(L-23STD) Insertion adopted. 

[255] 



MARCH 4, 86l 

istration. No foresight can anticipate, nor any document of rea- 
sonable length contain express provisions for all possible questions. 
Shall fugitives from labor be surrendered by national or by State 
authority? The Constitution does not expressly say. May Congress 
prohibit slavery in the territories? The Constitution does not ex- 
pressly say. Must Congress protect slavery in the territories? The 
Constitution does not expressly say. 

From questions of this class spring all our constitutional con- 
troversies, and we divide upon them into majorities and minori- 
ties. If the minority will not submit, 54 the majority must, or the 
government must cease. There is no other alternative; for con- 
tinuing the government, is submission 55 on one side or the other. 
If a minority, in such case, will secede rather than submit, 56 they 
make a precedent which, in turn, will divide and ruin them; for 
a minority of their own number 57 will secede from them whenever 
a majority refuses to be controlled by such minority. 58 For instance, 
why may not South Carolina, 59 a year or two hence, arbitrarily, 
secede from 60 a new Southern Confederacy, just as she 61 now 
claims to secede from the present Union? Her people, and, indeed, 
all secession people, 62 are now being educated to the precise temper 
of doing this. Is there such perfect identity of interests among the 
States to compose a Southern Union, as to produce harmony only, 
and prevent renewed secession? "Will 63 South Carolina be found 
lacking in either the restlessness or the ingenuity to pick a quar- 
rel with Kentucky? 

Plainly, the central idea of secession, is the essence of anarchy. 64 
A constitutional 65 majority is the only true sovereign of a free 

54 (S-23NTD) "Strike out 'submit' and insert 'acquiesce.' " 
(L.-23STD) Substitution adopted. 

55 (S-2KTD) "Strike out 'submission* & insert 'acquiescence.' " 
(L-2ND) Substitution adopted. 

56 (S-23NTD) "For 'submit' write 'acquiesce.* " 

(L-2ND) Substitution adopted. 57 (L-23STD) "Number" deleted. 

58 (L-2isrD) "Such minority" deleted, "them" inserted. 

59 (S-2KTD) "For 'South Carolina' write 'Alabama or Florida.' " 

(L-23STD) "South Carolina" deleted, "any portion of a new confederacy" in- 
serted. 

60 (L-23STD) "From a new Southern Confederacy" deleted, "again" inserted. 

61 (L-23NTD) "She now claims" changed to "the larger number now claim." 

62 (S-23NTD) "For [*] People ['] write 'communities.'" 

(L-2ND) "Her people, and, indeed, all secession people," deleted, "All who 
cherish secession ideas" inserted. 63 (L-is-r) This sentence deleted. 

64 (S-21STD) "After the word 'anarchy* strike out the next sentence and write 
[*]A majority held in restraint by constitutional checks and limitations and al- 
ways changing easily with deliberate changes of popular opinions and senti- 
ments is &c.[']" 

(L-2T-TD) " of disintegration" inserted following "anarchy " 

65 (L-2ND) "Constitutional" changed to "constitutionally expressed." 

[256] 



MARCH 4, l86l 

people. Whoever rejects it, does, of necessity, fly to anarchy or to 
despotism. Unanimity is impossible; the rule of a minority, as a 
permanent arrangement, is wholly inadmissable; so that, rejecting 
the majority principle, anarchy or despotism 66 is all that is left. 67 
Some, if not all of the States which claim to have withdrawn 
from the Union, have declared the supposed grievances which im- 
pelled them to the separation. Most prominent among these is the 
charge, in substance, that the Republican party have avozued the 
purpose to destroy the property of the Southern people. "With all 
due deference and respect, allow me to declare that the Republican 
party have made no such avowal. The Republican party of the na- 
tion have spoken but twice; and in both instances they expressly 
avowed what necessarily implies the exact contrary in 1860, as 

66 (L-isx) "In some form" inserted. 

67 (L-isx) The folio-wing paragraph is inserted at this point (variants en- 
closed in brackets are from the second edition as printed, and superior italic let- 
ters are the key to further revisions -which immediately follow the text) : "I do 
not forget the position assumed by some, that constitutional questions are to be 
decided by the Supreme Court; nor do I question [deny] that such decisions 
must be binding and conclusive ["and conclusive" deleted, "in any case," in- 
serted] upon the parties to a suit as to the subject [object] of that [the] - suit.* 
And, -while it is obviously possible, that such decision may be erroneous in any 
given case, still the evil effect following it, being limited to the [that] par- 
ticular case, with the chances [chance] that it may be over-ruled, and never 
become a precedent for other cases, can better be borne, than could the greater 
evils of a different rule. c But* 2 if the whole ["whole" deleted] policy of the 
government upon vital questions, extending to [affecting] the -whole people, 
is to be irrevocably fixed by decisions of the Supreme court, 6 it is plain that the 
people will have ceased to be their own rulers, having^ turned their govern- 
ment over to the despotism^ 7 of the few men [life-officers] composing the 
court. ISTor is there, in this view, any assault upon the court, or the judges. It 
is a duty from which they may not shrink, to decide cases, -when ["when" 
deleted] properly brought before them; and, it is no fault of theirs, if others 
seek to turn their decisions to political purposes." 

* (L-aisrD) "The" deleted, "that" inserted. 

6 (S-23ND) "After the words 'the suit,* [.#., at the end of the first sen- 
tence of Lincoln's insertion] insert [ c ] while they are entitled to very high re- 
spect and consideration in all parallel cases by all other departments of the 
government. [*] " 

c (S-23NTD) "Strike out 'rule' [,#., at end of second sentence in Lincoln's 
insertion] and insert 'practice.* " (L-2ND) "Rule" deleted, "practice" inserted. 

& (S-2ND) "Strike out 'But* [i.e., first -word in third sentence of Lincoln's 
insertion] and insert [ c ]At the same time the candid citizen must confess 
that.[*]" 

e (S-2]NT>) "After the -word [*] Court, [*] [z.^. 3 in the third sentence of 
Lincoln's insertion] strike out the words *it is plain that* and insert 'made in 
the ordinary course of litigation between parties in personal actions.* " 

f (S-2iNrD) "After the word [*] having ['] [z.#., in the third sentence of 
Lincoln's insertion] strike out the rest of the sentence and -write [*] practically 
resigned their government into the hands of that eminent tribunal.' " (L-23sro) 
"Pro tanto" inserted after "having." 

ff (L-arn?) "Despotism" deleted, "arbitrary control" inserted. 

[257] 



1VTARCHC 4, l86l 

already quoted in this discourse; and, in 1856, in their National 
Convention at Philadelphia, as I now read. 

"Resolved, That the maintenance of the principles promulgated 
in the Declaration of Independence, and embodied in the Federal 
Constitution, is essential to the preservation of Republican institu- 
tions, and that the Federal Constitution, the rights of the States., 
and the Union of the States, shall be preserved." 

In addition to this, I aver that, to my knowledge, no sub-division, 
or individual, of the Republican party has ever avowed, or enter- 
tained, a purpose to destroy or to interfere with the property of 
the Southern people. For myself, I can declare, with perfect cer- 
tainty, that I have never avowed, or entertained any such purpose; 
and I have never used any expression intended to convey such a 
meaning. 68 

The 69 Republican party, as I understand, have avowed the pur- 
pose to prevent, if they can, the extension of slavery, under the 
national auspices; and upon this arises the only 70 dispute between 
the sections. 

One section 71 believes slavery is right, and ought to be extended, 
while the other believes it is wrong, and ought not to be extended. 
This is the only substantial dispute. The fugitive slave clause of 
the Constitution, and the law for the suppression of the foreign 
slave trade, are each as well enforced, 72 as any law can ever be in 
a community where the moral sense of the people is against 73 the 
law itself. The great body of the people abide by the dry legal 
obligation in both cases, and a few break over in each. This, I think, 
cannot be perfectly cured; and it would be worse in both cases 
after the separation of the sections, than before. The foreign slave 
trade, now imperfectly suppressed, would be 74 revived without 

68 (L-IST) The following passage is inserted at this point: "The supposed 
purpose, then, of one section to destroy the property of the other, has no real 
existence; and to break up the government for that imaginary cause, would be 
a most melancholy mistake." At some point after his revision of the first edi- 
tion, and before the printing of his second edition, Lincoln decided to omit this 
paragraph, as well as the preceding quotation from the Republican resolution 
of 1856, and the sentence which introduced it. Neither they nor Lincoln's 
further insertion appear in the second edition. 

69 (S-2m>) "Strike out the whole paragraph.** 

70 (L-2ND) "Material" inserted. 

71 (S-2ND) "After the word 'section' insert [*]of our country. [']" 

72 (S-a^TD) "After the word 'enforced' write 'perhaps.' " 
(L-2ND) Insertion adopted. 

73 (S-airo) "Strike out the words 'is against' and insert 'imperfectly sup- 
ports.!']" 

(S-2isrD) "After the word *be' insert 'ultimately.* * 
Insertion adopted. 

[258] 



MARCH 4, l86l 

restriction, in one section; while fugitive slaves, now only partially 
surrendered, would not be surrendered at all, by the other. 

Physically speaking, we cannot separate. We cannot remove 
our respective sections from each other, nor build an impassable 
wall between them. A husband and wife may be divorced, and go 
out of the presence, and beyond the reach of each other; but the 
different parts of our country cannot do this. They cannot but re- 
main face to face; and intercourse, either amicable or hostile, must 
continue between them. Is it possible 75 to make that intercourse 
more advantageous or 76 satisfactory, after separation than before? 
Can aliens make treaties easier than friends can make laws? Can 
treaties be more faithfully enforced between aliens than laws can 
among friends? Suppose you go to war, you cannot fight always; 
and when, after much loss on both sides, and no gain on either, 
you cease fighting, the identical old questions, as to terms of inter- 
course, are again upon you. 

During 77 the winter just closed, I have been greatly urged, by 
many patriotic men, to lend the influence of my position to some 
compromise, by which I was, to some extent, to shift the ground 
upon which I had been elected. This I steadily refused. I so refused, 
not from any party wantonness, nor from any indifference to the 
troubles of the country. I thought such refusal was demanded by 
the view that if, when a Chief Magistrate is constitutionally elected, 
he cannot be inaugurated till he betrays those who elected him, 
by breaking his pledges, and surrendering to those who tried and 
failed to defeat him at the polls, this government and all popular 
government is already at an end. Demands for such surrender, 
once recognized, are without limit, as to nature, extent and repe- 
tition. They break the only bond of faith between public and pub- 
lic servant; and they distinctly set the minority over the 
majority. 

I presume there is not a man in America, (and there ought not 
to be one) who opposed my election, who would, for a moment, 
tolerate his own candidate in such surrender, had he been success- 
ful in the election. In such case they would all see, that such sur- 
render would not be merely the ruin of a man, or a party; but, as 
a precedent, would be the ruin of the government itself. 

I do not deny the possibility that the people may err in an elec- 
tion; but if they do, the true cure is in the next election; and not 
in the treachery of the party elected. 

7 *5 (X-2ND) "Then," inserted. 76 (L-aism) "More" inserted. 

77 (L-isT) The next three paragraphs have been deleted by clipping them out 
of the revised first edition. 

[259] 



MARCH 4, l86l 

Why 78 should there not be a patient confidence in the ultimate 
justice of the people? Is there any better or equal hope, in the 
world? In our present differences, is either party without faith 79 
in the right? If the Almighty Ruler of nations, with his eternal 
truth and justice, be 80 on our 81 side, or on yours, that truth and 
that justice will surely prevail, by the judgment of this great tri- 
bunal, the American people. 

By the frame of the government under which we live, this same 
people have widely given their public servants but little power for 
mischief; and have, with equal wisdom, provided for the return 
of that little to their own hands at very short intervals. 

While 82 the people remain patient, and true to themselves, no 
man, even in the presidential chair, by any extreme of wickedness 
or folly, can 83 very seriously injure the government in the short 
space of four years. 

This 84 country, with its institutions, belongs to the people who 
inhabit it. Whenever they shall grow weary of the existing gov- 
ernment, they can exercise their constitutional right of amending 
it, or their revolutionary right to dismember or overthrow it. As 85 
I am not much impressed with the belief that the present Consti- 
tution can be improved, I make no recommendations of amend- 
ments. I am, rather, for the old ship, and the chart of the old pilots. 
If, however, the people desire a new, or 86 an altered vessel, the 
matter is exclusively their own, and they can move in the prem- 
ises, as well without as with an executive recommendation. 87 I 
shall place no obstacle in the way of what may appear to be their 
wishes. 

The Chief Magistrate derives all his authority from the people, 
and they have conferred none upon him to fix terms for the sepa- 

78 (L-isx) The next three paragraphs have been clipped and inserted two 
paragraphs later. 79 (L-2ND) "Of being" inserted. 

80 (S-2ND) "Strike out the words 'be on our side or on yours' and insert 'be 
on the side of the North, or of the South, of the East or of the West.' " 

81 (L-23STD) "Our" deleted, "your" inserted; probably this is an error. 

82 (S~2]NT>) "Strike out all the words to and including 'chair* and insert 
'While the people retain their virtue and vigilance no legislature and no 
administration can.[']" 8S (S-2iro) "Strike out 'can.' " 

84 (L-isx) The next two paragraphs have been clipped and moved up three 
paragraphs to follow the sentence ending "are again upon you." 

85 (S-2Ni>) "Strike out the whole sentence and insert 'While so great a diver- 
sity of opinion exists on the question what amendments, if, indeed any would 
be effective in restoring peace and safety, it would only tend to aggravate the 
dispute if I were to attempt to give direction to the public mind in that re- 
spect. [']" 8 6 (L-21TO) "A new or" deleted. 

87 (L.-2ND) "The constitution itself prescribes two distinct modes, either of 
which they can pursue" inserted. 

[260] 



MARCH 4, l86l 

ration of the States. The people themselves can do this 88 if they 
choose; but the executive., as such, has nothing to do with it. His 
duty is to administer the present government, as it came to his 
hands, and to transmit it, 89 unimpaired by him, to his successor. 

My countrymen, one and all, take time and think well? upon 
this whole subject. Nothing 91 valuable can be lost by taking time. 
No thing 92 worth preserving is either breaking or burning. If there 
be an object to hurry any of you, in hot haste, to a point where 83 
you would never go 94 deliberately, that object will be frustrated 
by taking time; but no good object can be frustrated by it. Such 
of you as are now dissatisfied, still have the old Constitution un- 
impaired, and, on the sensitive point, the laws of your own framing 
under it; while the new administration will have no immediate 
power, if it would, to change either. If it were admitted that you 
who are dissatisfied, hold the right side in the dispute, there still 
is no single good reason for precipitate action. Intelligence, patriot- 
ism, Christianity, and a firm reliance on Him, who has never yet 
forsaken this favored land, are still competent to adjust, in the 
best way, all our present difficulty. 

In your hands, my dissatisfied fellow countrymen, and not in 
mine, is the momentous issue of civil war. The government -will 
not assail you, unless 95 you first assail it. You can have no con- 
flict, without being yourselves the aggressors. You have no oath 
registered in Heaven to destroy the government, while 7 shall have 
the most solemn one to "preserve, protect, and defend" it. You can 
forbear the assault upon it; 96 I can not shrink from the defense of 
it. 97 "With yoUy and not "with me, is the solemn question of 98 "Shall 
it be peace, or a sword?" 99 

ss (L-21N-D) "Too" inserted. 

89 (S-2ND) "After the words 'transmit it* insert 'if possible.* ** 

90 (S-srro) "Strike out the words 'take time* and insert 'think calmly.* ** 

91 (S-23NTD) "Strike out all from 'Nothing valuable [*] to ['] burning ['] both 
inclusive. 92 (L.-23STD) This sentence deleted. 

93 (L-isT) "Point where" deleted, "step which" inserted. 

9 * (L-isT) "Go" deleted, "take" inserted. 

95 (S-22STD) "Strike out the words 'unless you first assail it.[*]** 

9 <5 (L-isT) "Upon it" deleted. 

9 ? (L-isT) "Of it" deleted. 

(S-23NT>) "Strike out all after the word 'defense.' " 

9 s (L~2isrD) "Of" deleted. 

99 (S-2:NT>) On the back of the fourth page of Seward's list of suggestions ap- 
pears the following suggestion for a closing paragraph: "I close. "We are not we 
must not be aliens or enemies but ["countrym" deleted] fellow countrymen and 
brethren. Although passion has strained our bonds of affection too hardly they 
must not ["be broken they will not" deleted], I am sure they will not be broken. 
The mystic chords -which proceeding from ["every ba" deleted] so many battle 
fields and ["patriot" deleted] so many patriot graves ["bind" deleted] pass 

[261] 



MARCH 4, l86l 

through all the hearts and ["hearths" deleted] all the hearths in this broad con- 
tinent of ours will yet ["harmon" deleted] again harmonize in their ancient 
music when ["touched as they surely" deleted] breathed upon ["again" deleted] 
by the ["better angel" deleted] guardian angel of the nation." 

In addition to this suggestion, a manuscript page in the handwriting of Fred- 
erick W. Seward, who was his father's secretary, headed "Suggestions for a 
closing paragraph," reads as follows: 

"However unusual it may be at such a time to speak of sections or to sections, 
yet in view of the misconception & agitations which have strained the ties of 
brotherhood so far, I hope it will not be deemed a departure from propriety, 
whatever it may be from custom, to say that if in the criminations and miscon- 
structions which too often imbue our political contests, any man south of this 
capital has been led to believe that I regard with a less friendly eye, his rights, 
his interests or his domestic safety and happiness, or those of his State, than I 
do those of any other portion of my country or that I would invade or disturb 
any legal right or domestic institution in the South, he mistakes both my prin- 
ciples and feelings, and does not know me. I aspire to come in the spirit, how- 
ever far below the ability and the wisdom, of Washington, of Madison, of Jack- 
son and of Clay. In that spirit I here declare that in my administration I shall 
know no rule but the Constitution, no guide but the laws, and no sentiment but 
that of equal devotion to my whole country, east, west, north and south." 

First Inaugural Address Final Text 1 

March 4, 1861 
Fellow citizens of the United States: 2 

In compliance with a custom as old as the government itself, I 
appear before you to address you briefly, and to take, in your pres- 
ence, the oath prescribed by the Constitution of the United States, 
to be taken by the President "before he enters on the execution of 
his office." 

I do not consider it necessary, at present, for me to discuss those 
matters of administration about "which there is no special anxiety, 
or excitement. 3 

Apprehension seems to exist among the people of the Southern 
States, that by the accession of a Republican Administration, their 
property, and their peace, and personal security, are to be endan- 
gered. There has never been any reasonable cause for such appre- 
hension. Indeed, the most ample evidence to the contrary has all 
the while existed, and been open to their inspection. It is found in 
nearly all the published speeches of him who now addresses you. 

1 D and AD, DLC-RTL. The text is reproduced from Lincoln's final copy. All 
insertions and revised passages in Lincoln's handwriting are indicated in foot- 
notes. Lincoln's capitalization and use of the apostrophe have been made to con- 
form, in Lincoln's insertions, with the usage in the printed portions, otherwise 
Lincoln's usage is preserved. 

2 The salutation does not appear in Lincoln's final copy, but was written in by 
Nicolay on the press copy. 

3 Paragraph in Lincoln's handwriting, replacing paragraphs 2, 3, and 4 of the, 
preceding drafts 

[262] 



MARCH 4, l86l 

I do but quote from one of those speeches when I declare that "I 
have no purpose, directly or indirectly, to interfere with the insti- 
tution of slavery in the States where it exists. I believe I have no 
lawful right to do so, and I have no inclination to do so." Those 
who nominated and elected me did so with full knowledge that I 
had made this, and many similar declarations, and had never re- 
canted them. And more than this, they placed in the platform, for 
my acceptance, and as a law to themselves, and to me, the clear 
and emphatic resolution which I now read: 

"Resolved, That the maintenance inviolate of the rights of the 
States, and especially the right of each State to order and control 
its own domestic institutions according to its own judgment ex- 
clusively, is essential to that balance of power on which the per- 
fection and endurance of our political fabric depend; and we 
denounce the lawless invasion by armed force of the soil of any 
State or Territory, no matter under what pretext, as among the 
gravest of crimes." 

I now reiterate these sentiments: and in doing so, I only press 
upon the public attention the most conclusive evidence of which 
the case is susceptible, that the property, peace and security of no 
section are to be in anywise endangered by the now incoming Ad- 
ministration. I add too, that all the protection which, consistently 
with the Constitution and the laws, can be given, will be cheer- 
fully given to all the States 4 when lawfully demanded, for what- 
ever cause as cheerfully to one section, 5 as to another. 

There is much controversy about the delivering up of fugitives 
from service or labor. The clause I now read is as plainly written 
in the Constitution as any other of its provisions: 

"No person held to service or labor in one State, under the laws 
thereof, escaping into another, shall, in consequence of any law or 
regulation therein, be discharged from such service or labor, but 
shall be delivered up on claim of the party to whom such service 
or labor may be due." 

It is scarcely questioned that this provision was intended by 
those who made it, for the reclaiming of what we call fugitive 
slaves; and the intention of the law-giver is the law. All members 
of Congress swear their support to the whole Constitution to this 
provision as much as to any other. To the proposition, then, that 
slaves whose cases come within the terms of this clause, "shall be 
delivered up," their oaths are unanimous. Now, if they would 
make the effort in good temper, could they not, with nearly equal 

4 "When lawfully demanded, for whatever cause" inserted. 

5 Comma inserted. 

[263] 



MARCH 4 5 l86l 

unanimity, frame and pass a law, by means of which to keep good 
that unanimous oath? 

There is some difference of opinion whether this clause should 
be enforced by national or by state authority; but surely that dif- 
ference is not a very material one. If the slave is to be surrendered, 
it can be of but little consequence to him, or to others, by which 
authority it is done. And should any one, in any case, be content 
that his oath shall go unkept, on a merely unsubstantial contro- 
versy as to how it shall be kept? 

Again, in any law upon this subject, ought not all the safeguards 
of liberty known in civilized and humane jurisprudence to be 
introduced, so that a free man be not, in any case, surrendered as 
a slave? And 6 might it not be well, at the same time, to provide by 
law for the enforcement of that clause in the Constitution which 
guarranties that "The citizens of each State shall be entitled to all 
previleges and immunities of citizens in the several States?" 

I take the official oath to-day, with no mental reservations, and 
with no purpose to construe the Constitution or laws, by any hy- 
percritical rules. And while I do not choose 7 now to specify par- 
ticular acts of Congress as proper to be enforced, I do suggest, 8 
that it will be much safer for all, both in official and private sta- 
tions, to conform to, and abide by, all those acts which stand un- 
repealed, than to violate any of them, trusting to find impunity in 
having them held to be unconstitutional. 

It is 9 seventy-two years since the first inauguration of a Presi- 
dent under our national Constitution. During that period fifteen 
different and greatly distinguished citizens, have, in succession, 
administered the executive branch of the government. They have 
conducted it through many perils; and, generally, 10 with great 
success. Yet., with all this scope for precedent, I now enter upon 
the same task for the brief constitutional term of four years, under 
great and peculiar difficulty. A disruption of the Federal Union 11 
heretofore only menaced, is now formidably attempted. 

I hold, that in contemplation of universal law, and of the Con- 
stitution, the Union of these States is perpetual. Perpetuity is im- 
plied, if not expressed, in the fundamental law of all national gov- 
ernments, It is safe to assert that no government proper, ever had 
a provision in its organic law for its own termination. Continue to 

6 The rest of this paragraph, inserted. 

7 "Think proper" deleted, "choose" inserted. 8 Comma inserted. 

"Now" deleted. 10 "On the whole" deleted, "generally" inserted 

1* "Is menaced, and, so far as can he on paper, is already effected. The 
particulars of what has heen done are so familiar, and so fresh, that I need not 
to waste any time in recounting them." deleted, and revision inserted as ahove. 

[264] 



MARCH 4, l86l 

execute all the express provisions of our national Constitution, and 
the Union will endure forever it being impossible to destroy it, 
except by some action not provided for in the instrument itself. 

Again, if the United States be not a government proper, but an 
association of States in the nature of contract merely, can it, as a 
contract, be peaceably unmade, by less than all the parties who 
made it? One party to a contract may violate it break it, so to 
speak; but does it not require all to lawfully rescind it? 

Descending from these general principles, -we find the proposi- 
tion that, in legal contemplation, the Union is perpetual, confirmed 
by the history of the Union itself. The Union is much older than 
the Constitution. It was formed in fact, by the Articles of Associa- 
tion in 1774. It was matured and continued by the Declaration of 
Independence in 1776. It was further matured 12 and the faith of 
all the then thirteen States expressly plighted and engaged that it 
should be perpetual, by the Articles of Confederation in 1778. And 
finally, in 1787, one of the declared objects for ordaining and 
establishing the Constitution, was "to form a more perfect union." 

But if destruction of the Union, by one, or by a part only, of 
the States, be lawfully possible, the Union is less perfect than be- 
fore 13 the Constitution, 14 having lost the vital element of per- 
petuity. 

It follows from these views that no State, upon its own mere 
motion, can lawfully get out of the Union, that resolves and ordi- 
nances to that effect are legally void; 15 and that acts of violence, 
within any State or States, against the authority of the United 
States, are insurrectionary or revolutionary, 16 according to circum- 
stances. 

I 17 therefore consider that, in view of the Constitution and the 
laws, the Union is unbroken; and, to the extent of nay ability, I 
shall take care, as the Constitution itself expressly enjoins upon 
me, that the laws of the Union be faithfully executed in all the 
States. Doing this I deem to be only a simple duty on my part; 
and I shall perform it, so far as practicable, unless my rightful 
masters, the American people, shall withhold the requisite means, 
or, in some authoritative manner, 18 direct the contrary. I trust this 

12 "And expressly declared and pledged, to be" deleted, "and the f aith of all 
the then thirteen States expressly plighted and engaged that it should be" in- 
serted. 18 "Which contradicts" deleted. 

14 "And therefore is absurd" deleted, "Having lost the vital element of per- 
petuity" inserted. 15 "Nothing" deleted, "void" inserted. 

16 "Treasonable" deleted, "revolutionary" inserted. 

17 This sentence written on a slip pasted on the verso, replaces the sentence in 
preceding drafts. 

18 "Tangible way" deleted, "authoritative manner" inserted, 

[265] 



MARCH 4, l86l 

will not be regarded as a menace, but only as the declared purpose 
of the Union that it z^z'ZZ 19 constitutionally defend, and maintain 
itself. 

In doing this there needs to be no bloodshed or violence; and 
there shall be none, unless it be forced upon the national authority. 
The 20 power confided to me, will be used to hold, occupy, and 
possess the property, and places belonging to the government, and 
to collect the duties and imposts; but beyond what may be neces- 
sary for these objects, there will be no invasion no using of force 
against, or among the people anywhere. "Where hostility to the 
United States, in any interior locality, shall be so great and so 
universal, as to prevent competent resident citizens from holding 
the Federal offices, there will be no attempt to force obnoxious 
strangers among the people for that object. While the strict legal 
right may exist in the government to enforce the exercise of these 
offices, the attempt to do so would be so irritating, and so nearly 
impracticable with all, that I deem it better to forego, for the time, 
the uses of such offices. 

The mails, unless repelled, 21 will continue to be furnished in all 
parts of the Union. So far as possible, the people everywhere shall 
have that sense of perfect security which is most favorable to calm 
thought and reflection. The 22 course here indicated will be fol- 
lowed, unless current events, and experience, shall show a modi- 
fication, or change, to be proper; and in every case and exigency, 
my best discretion will be exercised, according to circumstances 
actually existing, and with a view and a hope of a peaceful solu- 
tion of the national troubles, and the restoration of fraternal sym- 
pathies and affections. 

That there are persons in one section, or another 23 who seek to 
destroy the Union at all events, and are glad of any pretext to do 
it, I -will neither affirm or deny; but if there be such, I need address 
no word to them. To those, however, who really love the Union, 
may I not speak? 

Before entering upon so grave a matter as the destruction of our 
national fabric, 24 with all its benefits, its memories, and its hopes, 
would it not be wise to ascertain precisely why we do it? Will you 

19 "Have Its own, and defend itself" deleted, "constitutionally defend, and 
maintain itself" inserted. 

20 This sentence inserted on a slip replacing the sentence in the preceding 
drafts. 21 "Refused" deleted, "repelled" inserted, 

22 The rest of this paragraph is inserted, replacing the sentence in preceding 
drafts. 23 "l n one section, or another" inserted. 

24 "Union" deleted, "fabric, with all its benefits, it's memories, and it's hopes," 
inserted. 

[266] 



MARCH 4, l86l 

hazard so desperate a step, while there is any possibility that any 
portion of the ills you fly from, have no real existence? "Will you, 
while the certain ills you fly to, are greater than all the real ones 
you fly from? Will you risk the commission of so fearful a mistake? 

All profess to be content in the Union, if all constitutional rights 
can be maintained. Is it true, then, that any 25 right, plainly written 
in the Constitution, has been denied? I think not. Happily the 
human mind is so constituted, 26 that no party can reach to the 
audacity of doing this. Think, if you can, of a single instance in 
which a plainly written provision of the Constitution has ever been 
denied. If, by the mere force of numbers, a majority should de- 
prive a minority of any clearly written constitutional right, it 
might, in a moral point of view, justify revolution certainly 
would, if such right were a vital one. 27 But such is not our case. 
All the vital rights of minorities, and of individuals, are so plainly 
assured to them, by affirmations and negations, guarranties and 
prohibitions, 28 in the Constitution, that controversies never arise 
concerning them. But no organic law can ever be framed with a 
provision specifically applicable to every 29 question which may 
occur in practical administration. No foresight can anticipate, nor 
any document of reasonable length contain express provisions for 
all possible questions. Shall fugitives from labor be surrendered by 
national or by State authority? The Constitution does not expressly 
say. May Congress prohibit slavery in the territories? The Consti- 
tution does not expressly say. Must Congress protect slavery in 
the territories? The Constitution does not expressly say. 

From questions of this class spring all our constitutional contro- 
versies, and we divide upon them into majorities and minorities. 
If the minority will not acquiesce, 30 the majority must, or the gov- 
ernment must cease. There is no other alternative; for continuing 
the government, is acquiescence 31 on one side or the other. If a 
minority, in such case, will secede rather than acquiesce, 32 they 
make a precedent which, in turn, will divide and ruin them; for 
a minority of their own 33 will secede from them, whenever a ma- 
jority refuses to be controlled by such minority. For instance, 34 

25 "Distinct** inserted and deleted. 

26 "Constructed" deleted, "constituted" inserted. 

27 Punctuation and capital inserted to "begin a new sentence. 

28 "Guarranties and prohibitions," inserted. 
2! * "Possible" inserted and deleted. 

30 "Submit" deleted, "acquiesce" inserted. 

31 "Submission" deleted, "acquiescence** inserted. 

32 "Submit" deleted, "acquiesce" inserted. 33 "Number" deleted. 

34 This sentence and the next are inserted on a slip replacing two sentences in 
the preceding drafts. 

[267] 



3vrAB.cu 4? i 8 6 i 

why may not any portion of a new confederacy, a year or two 
hence, arbitrarily secede again, precisely as portions of the present 
Union now claim to secede from it. All who cherish disunion sen- 
timents, are now being educated to the exact temper of doing this. 
Is there such perfect identity of interests among the States to com- 
pose a new 35 Union, as to produce harmony only, and prevent 
renewed secession? 

Plainly, the central idea of secession, is the essence of anarchy. 
A 36 majority, held in restraint by constitutional checks, and limi- 
tations, and always changing easily, with deliberate changes of 
popular opinions and sentiments, is the only true sovereign of a 
free people. Whoever rejects it, does, of necessity, fly to anarchy 
or to despotism. Unanimity is impossible; the rule of a minority, 
as a permanent arrangement, is wholly inadmissable; so that, re- 
jecting the majority principle, anarchy, or despotism in some 
form, is all that is left. 

I do not forget the position assumed by some, that constitutional 
questions are to be decided by the Supreme Court; nor do I deny 
that such decisions must be binding in any case, upon the parties 
to a suit, as to the object of that 37 suit, while 38 they are also en- 
titled to very high respect and consideration, in all paralel cases, 
by all other departments of the government. And while it is obvi- 
ously possible that such decision may be erroneous in any given 
case, still the evil effect following it, being limited to that particu- 
lar case, with the chance that it may be over-ruled, and never 
become a precedent for other cases, can better be borne than 39 
could the evils of a different practice. At the same time the candid 
citizen must confess that if the policy of the government, upon 
vital questions, affecting the whole people, is to be irrevocably 
fixed by decisions of the Supreme Court, the instant they are made, 
in ordinary litigation between parties, in personal actions, the peo- 
ple will have ceased, to be their own rulers, having, to that extent, 
practically resigned their government, into the hands of that emi- 
nent tribunal. Nor is there, in this view, any assault upon the 
court, or the judges. It is a duty, from which they may not shrink, 
to decide cases properly brought before them; and it is no fault of 
theirs, if others seek to turn their decisions to political purposes. 

One section of our country 40 believes slavery is right., and ought 

35 "Southern" deleted, "new" inserted. 

36 This sentence inserted in place of the sentence in preceding drafts. 

37 "The" deleted, "that" inserted. ss The rest of this sentence is inserted. 
39 The rest of this paragraph is written on a slip laid over the remainder of 

the paragraph and the next short paragraph [The Republican party, as I under- 
stand. . . .] in the preceding drafts. 40 "Of our country" inserted. 

[268] 



MARCH 4^ l86l 

to be extended, while the other believes it is wrong., and ought not 
to be extended. This is the only substantial dispute. The fugitive 
slave clause of the Constitution, and the law for the suppression 
of the foreign slave trade, are each as well enforced, perhaps, 41 as 
any law can ever be in a community where the moral sense of the 
people imperfectly supports 42 the law itself. The great body of the 
people abide by the dry legal obligation in both cases, and a few- 
break over in each. This, I think, cannot be perfectly cured; and 
it would be worse in both cases after the separation of the sections, 
than before. The foreign slave trade, now imperfectly suppressed, 
would be ultimately 43 revived without restriction, in one section; 
while fugitive slaves, now only partially surrendered, would not 
be surrendered at all, by the other. 

Physically speaking, we cannot separate. We cannot remove our 
respective sections from each other, nor build an impassable wall 
between them. A husband and wif e may be divorced, and go out of 
the presence, and beyond the reach of each other; but the different 
parts of our country cannot do this. They cannot but remain face 
to face; and intercourse, either amicable or hostile, must continue 
between them. Is it possible then 44 to make that intercourse more 
advantageous, or more 45 satisfactory, after separation than before? 
Can aliens make treaties easier than friends can make laws? Can 
treaties be more faithfully enforced between aliens, than laws can 
among friends? Suppose you go to war, you cannot fight always; 
and when, after much loss on both sides, and no gain on either, 
you cease fighting, the identical old questions, as to terms of inter- 
course, are again upon you. 

This country, with its institutions, belongs to the people who 
inhabit it. "Whenever they shall grow weary of the existing gov- 
ernment, they can exercise their constitutional right of amending 
it, or their revolutionary right to dismember, or overthrow it. I 46 
can not be ignorant of the fact that many worthy, and patriotic 
citizens are desirous of having the national constitution amended. 
While I make no recommendation of amendments, I fully recog- 
nize the rightful authority of the people over the whole subject, 
to be exercised in either of the modes prescribed in the instrument 
itself; and I should, under existing circumstances, favor, rather 
than oppose, a fair oppertunity being afforded the people to act 
upon it. 

41 "Perhaps" inserted. 

42 "Is against" deleted, "imperfectly supports" inserted. 

43 "Ultimately" inserted. 44 "Then" inserted. 45 "More" inserted. 
46 The rest of this paragraph and the next two paragraphs are -written on slips 

replacing the remainder of the paragraph in the preceding drafts. 

[269] 



MARCH 4, l86l 

I will venture to add that, to me, the convention mode seems 
preferable, in that it allows amendments to originate with the 
people themselves, instead of only permitting them to take, or 
reject, propositions, originated by others, not especially chosen for 
the purpose, and which might not be precisely such, as they would 
wish to either accept or refuse. I understand a proposed amend- 
ment to the Constitution which amendment, however, I have not 
seen, has passed Congress, to the effect that the federal govern- 
ment, shall never interfere with the domestic institutions of the 
States, including that of persons held to service. To avoid miscon- 
struction of what I have said, I depart from ray purpose not to 
speak of particular amendments, so far as to say that, holding such 
a provision to now be implied constitutional law, I have no objec- 
tion to its being made express, and irrevocable. 

The Chief Magistrate derives all his authority from the people, 
and they have conferred none upon him to fix terms for the sepa- 
ration of the States. The people themselves can do this also 47 if 
they choose; but the executive, as such, has nothing to do with it. 
His duty is to administer the present government, as it came to his 
hands, and to transmit it, unimpaired by him, to his successor. 

Why should there not be a patient confidence in the ultimate 
justice of the people? Is there any better, or equal hope, in the 
world? In our present differences, is either party without faith of 
being 48 in the right? If the Almighty Ruler of nations, with his 
eternal truth and justice, be on your side of the North, or on yours 
of the South, 49 that truth, and that justice, will surely prevail, by 
the judgment of this great tribunal, the American people. 

By the frame of the government under which we live, this same 
people have wisely given their public servants but little power for 
mischief; and have, with equal wisdom, provided for the return 
of that little to their own hands at very short intervals. 

While the people 50 retain their virtue, and vigilence, no admin- 
istration, by any extreme of wickedness or folly, can very seriously 
injure the government, in the short space of four years. 

My countrymen, one and all, 51 think calmly and ivell, upon this 
whole subject. Nothing valuable can be lost by taking time. 52 If 
there be an object to hurry any of you, in hot haste, to a step which 

47 "Also" inserted. 4 "Of being" inserted. 

49 "Our side, or on yours" deleted, "your side of the North, or on yours of the 
South" inserted. 

50 "Remain patient, and true to themselves, no man, even in the presidential 
chair" deleted, "retain their virtue, and vigilence, no administration" inserted. 

51 "Take time and think" deleted, "think calmly and" inserted. 

52 "Nothing worth preserving is either breaking or burning" deleted. 

[270] 



MARCH 4, l86l 

you would never take deliberately, that object will be frustrated 
by taking time; but no good object can be frustrated by it. Such 
of you as are now dissatisfied, still have the old Constitution un- 
impaired, and, on the sensitive point, the laws of your own fram- 
ing under it; while the new administration will have no immediate 
power, if it would, to change either. If it were admitted that you 
who are dissatisfied, hold the right side in the dispute, there still 
is no single good reason for precipitate action. Intelligence, patriot- 
ism, Christianity, and a firm reliance on Him, who has never yet 
forsaken this favored land, are still competent to adjust, in the best 
way, all our present difficulty. 

In your hands, my dissatisfied fellow countrymen, and not in 
mine., is the momentous issue of civil war. The government will 
not assail you. 5B You can have no conflict, without being your- 
selves the aggressors. You have no oath registered in Heaven to 
destroy the government, while / shall have the most solemn one 
to "preserve, protect and defend" it. 54 

I am loth to close. We are not enemies, but friends. We must 
not be enemies. Though passion may have strained, it must not 
break our bonds of affection. The mystic chords of memory, strech- 
ing from every battle-field, and patriot grave, to every living heart 
and hearthstone, all over this broad land, will yet swell the chorus 
of the Union, when again touched, as surely they will be, by the 
better angels of our nature. 

53 "Unless you first assail it" deleted. 

54 Last two sentences of preceding drafts deleted, and the final paragraph 
written on the bottom of the page. See Seward's suggestion for the final para- 
graph (note 99) of the revisions of the first edition supra, which furnished the 
basis for Lincoln's final paragraph. See also note 41 of the revisions of the first 
edition, for the sentence which Lincoln jotted down on the back of Browning's 
letter of February 17, 1861. 



Appointment of John G. Nicolay 1 

March 4, 1861 

Pursuant to the authority vested in me by the second Section 
of the Act of Congress of the third of March 1857, 1 hereby appoint 
John G. Nicolay, of Illinois, Private Secretary to the President of 
the United States. ABRAHAM LINCOLN 

Washington, 

4th. March 1861. 

DLC-Nicolay Papers. 

[271] 



Reply to a New York Delegation 1 

March 4, 1861 
[Times Version] 

FELLOW CITIZENS: I thank you for this visit, I thank you that 
you call upon me, not in any sectional spirit, but that you come, 
without distinction of party, to pay your respects to the President 
of the United States. I am informed that you are mostly citizens of 
New- York. [Cries of "All," "all."] You all appear to be very 
happy. May I hope that the public expression which I have this 
day given to my sentiments, may have contributed in some degree 
to your happiness. [Emphatic exclamations of assent.] As far as I 
am concerned, the loyal citizens of every State, and of every sec- 
tion, shall have no cause to feel any other sentiment. [Cries of 
"Good," "Good."] As towards the disaffected portion of our fel- 
low-citizens, I will say, as every good man throughout the country 
must feel, that there will be more rejoicing over one sheep that is 
lost, and is found, than over the ninety-and-nine which have gone 
not astray. [Great cheering.] And now, my friends, as I have risen 
from the dinner-table to see you, you will excuse me for the 
brevity of my remarks, and permit me again to thank you heart- 
ily, and cordially, for this pleasant visit, as I rejoin those who 
await my return. 

[Star Version] 

Friends and Fellow-Citizens: I understood, both before I ap- 
peared from your committee and by the introduction of my 
friend, 2 that you were from New York. You seem to be in good 
humor after the proceedings of the day. If I have been fortunate 
enough to contribute to your good feeling I am glad, and I shall 
rejoice if what I have said may cause the friends of the Union 
South to feel good when they hear it. I made it as near right as I 
could, in my poor humble judgment, and in accordance with the 
principles of the Constitution and the perpetuity of freedom. 
[Cheers.] I made it as well for the good of those who lived south 
of Mason and Dixon's line as you who live north of that line. 
[Cheers.] As I rise from the dinner table to speak to you, I hope 
it will not be amiss to bid you good night. 

*New York Times, March 5, 1861; Washington Evening Star, March 6, 
1861. The Times reports the delegation as "numbering at least five hundred," 
and the Star "nearly a thousand strong." Brackets are in the sources. 

2 According to the Star Lincoln was introduced by William H. Ferry, state 
senator from Oneida County; according to the Times Stewart L. Wadford in- 
troduced the delegation to Lincoln. 

[272] 



To William H. Seward 1 

Executive Mansion. March 4 1861. 

My dear Sir: Your note of the 2nd. Inst. asking to withdraw 
your acceptance of my invitation to take charge of the State De- 
partment, was duly received. 

It is the subject of most painful solicitude with me; and I feel 
constrained to beg that you will countermand the withdrawal. The 
public interest, I think, demands that you should; and my personal 
feelings are deeply inlisted in the same direction. Please consider, 
and answer by 9 o'clock, A.M. to-morrow. Your Obt. Servt. 

Hon. W. H. Seward. A. 



1ALS, NAuK Seward's brief letter of March 2 stipulates that "Circum- 
stances which have occurred since I expressed to you in December last my 
willingness to accept the office of Secretary of State seem to me to render it 
my duty to ask leave to withdraw that consent." (DL.C-B.TLi). 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Dear Sir: Executive Chamber March 5. 1861 

If the public service admits of a change, without injury, in the 
office of chief clerk of the War Department, I shall be pleased of 
[szc] my friend, E. Elmer Ellsworth, 2 who presents you this, shall 
be appointed. Of course, if you see good reason to the contrary, 
this is not intended to be arbitrary. Yours truly A LINCOUNT 

Hon. Simon Cameron. 

* ALS, DLC-Cameron Papers. 

2 Colonel Elmer Ephraim. Ellsworth was a young law student of Chicago 
who in 1860 had raised and trained a company of Zouaves which became 
famous for drill exhibitions. On Lincoln's invitation he accompanied the presi- 
dential party to Washington. Being inclined to active military service instead 
of a clerkship, he proceeded to New York to organize a Zouave regiment. His 
spectacular death at Alexandria, Virginia, occurred May 24, 1861, when he was 
shot by the proprietor of a hotel from the roof of which he was removing a 
Confederate flag. He is usually credited with being the first casualty of the 
Civil War. See Lincoln's letter to Ellsworth's parents, May 25, infra. Al- 
though there is considerable confusion of Ellsworth's first and second names, 
the Dictionary of American Biography accepts "Elmer Ephraim" on the basis 
of a manuscript account written by Ellsworth's mother. 

Reply to Pennsylvania Delegation 1 

March 5, 1861 

Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen of the Pennsylvania Delegation: 
As I have so frequently said 2 heretofore, when I 'have had oc- 
casion to address the people of the Keystone, in my visits to that 

[273] 



MARCH 5, l86l 

State, I can now but repeat the assurance of my gratification at the 
support you gave me at the late election, and at the promise of a 
continuation of that support which is now tendered to me. 

Allusion has been made to the hope that yoti entertain that you 
have a President and a Government. In respect to that I wish to 
say to you, that in the position I have assumed I wish to do no 
more than I have ever given reason to believe I would do. I do 
not wish you to believe that I assume to be any better than others 
who have gone before me. I prefer rather to have it understood that 
if we ever have a Government on the principles we prefer, we 
should remember while we exercise our opinion, that others have 
also rights to the exercise of their opinions, and we should en- 
deavor to allow these rights, and act in such a manner as to create 
no bad feeling. I hope we have a Government and a President. I 
hope and wash it to be understood that there may be allusion to no 
unpleasant differences. 

We must remember that the people of all the States are entitled 
to all the privileges and immunities of the citizens of the several 
States. We should bear this in mind, and act in such a way as to 
say nothing insulting or irritating. I would inculcate this idea, so 
that we may not, like Pharisees, set ourselves up to be better than 
other people. 

Now my friends, my public duties are pressing today, and will 
prevent my giving more time to you. Indeed, I should not have left 
them now, but I could not well deny myself to so large and re- 
spectable a body. 

1 Philadelphia Inquirer, March 6, 1861. Lincoln responded to a speech "by 
Winthrop W. Ketchum of Lruzerne, Pennsylvania. The order in which Lincoln 
received the various state delegations on March 5 has been deduced from the 
press reports, but may not be entirely accurate In addition to delegations from 
Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, and Illinois, a delegation from Michigan "some 
150 strong headed by Senator Chandler, paid a visit of respect. . . ." (Wash- 
ington Evening Star, March 6, 1861), but no speech was reported. 

2 Inquirer has "heard" instead of "said." 

Reply to Massachusetts Delegation 1 

March 5, 1861 

I am thankful for this renewed assurance of kind feeling, and 
confidence, and support of the Old Bay State, in so far as you, Mr. 
Chairman, have expressed, in behalf of those whom you represent, 
your sanction of what I have enunciated in my inaugural address. 
This is very grateful to my feelings. The subject was one of great 
delicacy, in presenting views at the opening of an administration 
under the peculiar circumstances attending my entrance upon the 

[274] 



MARCH 5, l86l 

official duties connected with the Government. I studied all the 
points with great anxiety, and have presented them with whatever 
of ability and sense of justice I could bring to bear. 

If it meet the approbation of our good friends in Massachusetts, 
I shall be exceedingly gratified; while I hope it will meet the ap- 
probation of friends everywhere. I am thankful for the expressions 
of those who have voted with us; and like every other man of you, 
I like them certainly as I do others. [Laughter.] As President, in 
the administration of the Government, I hope to be man enough 
not to know one citizen of the United States from another, [cries 
of "Good!"] nor one section from another. I shall be gratified to 
have the good friends of Massachusetts and others, who have thus 
far supported me in these national views, still to support me in 
carrying them out. 

1 Washington National Republican and New York Tribune, March 6; and 
Washington Evening Star, March 5, 1861. Lincoln replied to a speech by 
Charles R. Train, congressman from Framingham, Massachusetts. 

Reply to Illinois Delegation 1 

March 5, 1861 

Mr. Arnold, and fellow citizens of my own State of Illinois: I am 
obliged to you for this renewed mart of your kindness and confi- 
dence in my humble self. I have so often addressed the people of 
Illinois, and so frequently in their hearing said all that I know 
how to say, that I am a little more troubled to know what not to 
say upon this occasion than I ever have been. [Laughter.] We are 
all rejoiced, doubtless, at the success so far of the principles of 
Government which we have regarded as being just and right; 
which, as I hope, we have contended for only because we so re- 
garded them, not because of any selfishness or sectionalism, or any- 
thing calculated to wrong any other of our citizens or section of 
the country. I certainly can say for myself, and I think for the 
rest of you, that these are the sentiments which have actuated all 
of us. And having advanced as far as we have in this cause, I have 
to request of you, which I think I need hardly do, either, that you 
will sustain me in trying to do ample and full justice to all the 
people of the different sections of this great Confederacy. [Ap- 
plause.] In saying this, I think I have said as much as I know how 
to say upon this occasion. [Laughter and applause.] 

1 Washington National Republican and Evening Star, March 6, 1861. Lin- 
coln responded to a speech by Isaac N. Arnold, congressman from Chicago. 
According to the Star the delegation numbered "several hundred." Brackets 
are in the sources. 

[275] 



To William H. Seward 1 

Hon. W. H. Seward. Executive Chamber 

My dear Sir March 5, 1861 

Please give me an interview at once Yours truly 

A. LINCOLN 

i ALS, NAuE. 

To "William H. Seward 1 

My dear Sir: Executive Mansion March 6. 1861 

Will you please send me the blank nominations of Mr. Judd & 

Mr. Kreismann as spoken of by us? 

I wish to send them in to-day. Yours truly A LINCOLN 

Hon. Sec. of State. 

1 ALS, NAuE. On March 8, Lincoln appointed Norman B. Judd envoy 
and minister at Berlin, and Herman Kreismann secretary of the legation. 

Reply to Minnesota Delegation 1 

March 6, 1861 

Mr. Senator, members and gentlemen: I am very glad to meet 
you this evening, and thank you for the compliment of this visit. 
I have no time to make a speech, even if I desired to do so, but I 
wish to express the pleasure I have experienced in contemplating 
your enterprising people, and watching the rapid advance of 
everything desirable in that young sister in the Republic-Minne- 
sota, You may some of you differ from me, and I may be wrong, 
but, according to my judgment, the people up your way have very 
correct political views, and so in that particular, also, I give them 
my approbation. (Laughter.) And while their political sentiments 
accord with mine, I have no reason to doubt that they look upon 
the rights of their brethren further South, as being entirely equal 
to their own. (Applause.) and that while Minnesota will maintain 
her principles, she will require and permit nothing to be done, that 
does not favor the maintenance of the Constitution and fidelity to 
the Union. (Cheers.) 

1 Cincinnati Daily Commercial^ March 11, 1861. Lincoln replied to a speech 
by Senator Morton S. Wilkinson. Following the speech, the reporter (Henry 
Villard) added: "The President then shook hands, and bowed himself out with 
less grace than Beau Brummel or Chesterfield, excusing himself by informing 
his guests that "a great man of my own making" (some Cabinet Officer prob- 
ably CALEB SMITH:!) "is waiting for me upstairs." Delegations from Indiana, 
Maine, Ohio, California, and Vermont, also paid their respects on this date, 
but no reports of speeches made by Lincoln have been discovered. 

[276] 



To William H. Seward 1 

Executive Chamber. March 7. 1861 

My dear Sir Herewith is the Diplomatic address and my reply. 2 
To -whom the reply should be addressed that is, by what title, or 
style, I do not quite understand; and therefore I have left it blank. 
Will you please bring with you to-day the Message from the 
War Department, with Gen. Scott's note upon it, which we had 
here yesterday? 3 I wish to examine the General's opinion, which 
I have not yet done. Yours very truly A. LiKrcouNF 

Hon. W. H. Seward. 

1ALS, NAuE. 2 Vide infra. 

s See Lincoln to General Scott, March. 9, infra. Probably the letter was the 
one, referred to there, from Joseph Holt. 

Reply to Diplomatic Corps 1 

March 7, 1861 
Mr. Figanlere and Gentlemen of the Diplomatic Body: 

Please accept my sincere thanks for your kind congratulations. 

It affords me pleasure to confirm the confidence you so gener- 
ously express in the friendly disposition of the United States, 
through me, towards the Sovreigns, and Governments you re- 
spectively represent. With equal satisfaction I accept the assurance 
you are pleased to give, that the same disposition is reciprocated 
by your Sovereigns, your Governments, and yourselves. 

Allow me to express the hope that these friendly relations may 
remain undisturbed; and also my fervent wishes for the health 
and happiness of yourselves personally. 

1 AD, DLC-RTL, The manuscript is in Lincoln's handwriting except for 
the salutation, which was presumably supplied by an official in the State De- 
partment. See Lincoln to Seward, supra. J. C. de Figaniere e Morao, minister 
from Portugal, as the senior minister in service from a foreign country at 
Washington, gave "an address in French, a translation of which had pre- 
viously been furnished to Mr. Lincoln." (New York Tribune, March 8, 1861). 

To Whom It May Concern 1 

Whom it may concern. Executive Mansion March 7. 1861 

William Johnson, a colored boy, and bearer of this, has been 
with me about twelve months; and has been, so far, as I believe, 
honest, faithful, sober, industrious, and handy as a servant. 

A. LlKTCOLTNT 

1 ALS, NN. The Register of Officers and Agents, Civil, Military, and Naval, 
in the Service of the U.S. (hereafter cited as U.S. Official Register), 1861, lists 
"W. H. Johnson, Fireman, President's House, $600 per annum." See also Lin- 
coln to Welles, March 16, infra. 

[277] 



To Schuyler Colfax 1 

Hon. Schuyler Colfax Executive Mansion March 8. 1861 

My dear Sir: Your letter of the 6th. has just been handed me 
by Mr. Baker 2 of Minnesota. When I said to you, the other day, 
that I wished to write you a letter, I had reference, of course, to 
my not having offered you a cabinet appointment. I meant to say, 
and now do say, you were most honorably and amply recom- 
mended; and a tender of the appointment was not withheld on any 
ground disparaging to you. Nor was it withheld, in any part, be- 
cause of anything happening in 1858 indeed, I should have de- 
cided as I did, easier than I did, had that matter never existed. I 
had partly made up my mind in favor of Mr. Smith not con- 
clusively of course before your name was mentioned in that con- 
nection. When you were brought forward I said "Colfax is a young 
man is already in position is running a brilliant career, and is 
sure of a bright future in any event. 77 "With Smith, it is now or 
never." I considered either abundantly competent, and decided on 
the ground I have stated. I now have to beg that you will not do 
me the injustice to suppose, for a moment, that I remembered 
any thing against you in malice. Yours very truly A. 



1 ALS-P, ISLA. After calling on Lincoln with the Indiana delegation on 
March 6, Colfax had written "The very kindly remarks you made to me this 
morning were specially gratifying. . . . What has pained me more than any 
thing else was the rumor that your action was governed by 'prejudice on ac- 
count of alleged Douglas proclivities in 1858'. . . ." (DLC-RTL). 

2 Probably James EL Baker, secretary of state for Minnesota. 



Endorsement: Benjamin F. Wade to Lincoln 1 

[c. March 8, 1861] 

If Mr. Anderson is better recommended in the Department than 
any other, for consul to Hamburg let him be appointed, 

A. LINCOUNT 

1AES, DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 216. Wade to Lincoln, March 
8, 1861, recommended "James H. Anderson, Esqr., the bearer, of Marion, 
Ohio," for a German consulship, preferably at Hamburg. Anderson received the 
consulship at Hamburg. 



To Edward Bates 1 

March 9, 1861 

Please let Senator Wade name the man to be District Attorney 
for the Northern District of Ohio. . . . 

[278] 



MARCH 9, l86l 

i American Art Association Anderson Galleries Catalog 3955, March 4, 1932, 
No. 118. This fragmentary text is all that is available. According to the cata- 
log description, a note by Senator Benjamin F. Wade, written on the bottom 
of Lincoln's letter, makes the appointment. Robert F. Paine of Cleveland re- 
ceived the appointment. 



To Winfield Scott 1 

Lieutenant General Scott: Executive Mansion, March 9, 1861. 

My dear Sir: On the 5th inst. I received from the Hon. Joseph 
Holt, 2 the then faithful and vigilant Secretary of War, a letter of 
that date, inclosing a letter and accompanying documents received 
by him on the 4th inst. from Major Robert Anderson command- 
ing at Fort Sumpter South Carolina; and copies of all which I now 
transmit. Immediately on the receipt of them by me, I transmitted 
the whole to you for your consideration; and the same day you 
returned the package to me with your opinion endorsed upon it, 3 a 
copy of which opinion I now also transmit to you. Learning from 
you verbally that since then you have given the subject a more 
fuU and thorough consideration, you will much oblige me by giv- 
ing answers, in writing, to the following interrogatories: 

ist To what point of time can Major Anderson maintain his 
position at Fort Sumpter, without fresh supplies or reinforce- 
ment? 

ad. Can you, with all the means now in your control, supply or 
re-inforce Fort Sumpter within that time? 

3d If not, what amount of means and of what description, in 
addition to that already at your control, would enable you to sup- 
ply and reinforce that fortress within the time? 

Please answer these, adding such statements, information, and 
counsel as your great skill and experience may suggest. 4 Your obe- 
dient Servant A. 



iCopy, DLC-R.TL. 

2 Postmaster General Holt (1859-1861) had assumed charge of the War De- 
partment upon John B. Floyd's withdrawal from the cabinet, and remained 
as secretary under Lincoln until Simon Cameron took over on March 5. 

3 Holt's letter to Lincoln, March 5, bears Scott's endorsement: "... I now 
see no alternative but a surrender ... as ... we cannot send the third of 
the men in several months, necessary to give them relief. . . ." (DLC-RTL). 

4 Scott to Lincoln, March 11, 1861, answers Lincoln's three questions as 
follows: (i) ". . , he has hard bread, flour & rice for about 26 days, &? salt 
meat . . for about 48 .... how long he could hold out . . . cannot be an- 
swered with absolute accuracy. . . ." (2) "No: Not within many months. . . ." 
(3) "... a fleet of war vessels & transports, 5,000 additional regular troops & 
20,000 volunteers .... would require new acts of Congress & from six to 
eight months." (DLC-RTL). 

[279] 



To Winfield Scott 1 

'War Department, March g, 1861. 

My dear Sir: I am directed by the President to say he desires 
you to exercise all possible vigilance for the maintenance of all the 
places within the military department of the United States, and to 
promptly call upon all the departments of the government for the 
means necessary to that end. [Siivtorsr CAMERON.] 

i NH, VI, 188. Although the original has not been located, Nicolay and Hay 
describe it as "drafted by President Lincoln and Signed by the Secretary of 
War" Brackets are in the source. 



To William H. Seward 1 

My dear Sir Executive Mansion March 9. 1861 

I wish you would give Mr. Schurz 2 a full interview. Your Obt. 

Servt. A. 

Hon. W. H. Seward. 

1ALS, NAuE. 

2 Carl Schurz, who was appointed minister to Spain, March 28. 



To Gideon Welles 1 

Executive Mansion March 9, 1861 

Will the Sec. of Navy please call on me at once. Yours &c. 

A. LnsrcoLisr 

1 ALS, The Rosenbach Company, Philadelphia and New York. 



Remarks to Oregon Delegation 1 

March 9, 1861 

A gentleman o the party remarked "that Oregon 'was a large 
State, and would soon wield a powerful influence upon the affairs 
of Government." 

"Oh, yes," said Mr. Lincoln; "it's rather larger than Maryland 
and Rhode Island, which a man can hurry across in a few hours.' 

Some one remarked that "they had heard of a man who was no1 
long getting across one of those States." 

Mr. Lincoln, with a comical twist of his face, responded: 
"Gentlemen, if you please we won't say anything more on thai 
subject;" and it was "drapped." 2 

[280] 



MARCKt 11, l86l 

1 Washington Evening Star, March 12, 1861. 

2 The reference, of course, is to Lincoln's secret passage from Philadelphia 
to Washington on the night of February 22, -which was heartily lampooned in 
the Democratic press. 

To Truman Smith 1 

Executive Mansion March 10. 1861 
Mr. L. will see Mr. Truman Smith at 8 o'clock this evening. 

i AL, DLC-HW. 

To Edward Bates 1 

Hon. E. Bates Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: March 11. 1861 

This introduces Hon. I. N. Morris, with whom I wish you would 
converse in relation to the Russell fraud. I think it may subserve 
the public interest Yours truly A. Lnsrcousr 

1ALS, MoSHi. William Hepburn Russell of New York City, a member 
of the firm of Russell, Majors & Company was involved in a financial scandal 
too complicated for brief summary. The Dictionary of American Biography 
may be consulted for an adequate account. 



To William EL Seward 1 

Hon. Sec. of State. Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir March 11, 1861 

What think you of sending ministers at once as follows. 
Dayton to England. 
Fremont to France 
Clay to Spain. 
Corwin to Mexico? 

We need to have these points guarded as strongly and quickly 
as possible. 

This is suggestion merely, and not dictation. Your Obt. Servt. 

A. 



1 ALS, NAuE. Seward replied the same day that he approved Cassius 
M. Clay for Spain and Thomas Corwin for Mexico, but "As to Fremont and 
France the prestige is good. But I think that is all. If as I have heard, he is 
to be engaged in raising money there for his estates, it would be a serious 
complication. Beside this he is by birth and education a South Carolinian. . . . 
I would rather send Dayton there. 

"For England I am sure Mr [Charles F.] Adams [is?] far above all others 
adapted to British Court &, society and infinitely more watchful capable . . . 
every thing. New England is an important point. What better can we do for 

[281] 



MARCH 12, l86l 

her. N. Jersey gives us little, and that grudgingly. I think Daytons appoint- 
ment would be as much too large for her as any thing else we are likely to 
do for New England would be too small for her. . , ." (DLC-RTL). 

To Montgomery Blair 1 

Hon. Post-Master General Executive Mansion. 

My dear Sir March 12. 1861 

I understand that the outgoing and incoming Representatives 
for the Cleveland District, unite in recommending Edwin Cowles 2 
for P.M. in that City; that Senator Wade has considered the case 
& declines to interfere; & that no other M.C. interferes. Under 
these circumstances, if correct, I think Mr. Cowles better be ap- 
pointed. Yours truly A 



laHA. 

2 Edwin Cowles, editor of the Cleveland Leader, received the appointment 

To Jacob Collamer 1 

Hon. Jacob Colamer. Executive Mansion. 

My dear Sir: March 12. 1861 

God help me! It is said I have offended you. Please tell me how. 
Yours very truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, owned hy Charles W. Olsen, Chicago, Illinois. See Lincoln to Colla- 
mer, March 15, infra. 

To Joseph Holt 1 

Hon. Joseph Holt: Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: March 12. 1861 

I will be much obliged, if you will give me a private interview, 
to-day, say at 1 1 o'clock, A.M. Your Obt. Servt. A. LINCOLN 

i ALS, DLC-Holt Papers. 

To Montgomery Blair 1 

Hon. P.M.G. Executive Mansion 

Dear Sir March 13, 1861 

The bearer of this, Mr. C. T. Hempston, 2 is a Virginian who 
wishes to get, for his son, a small place in your Dept. I think Vir- 
ginia should be heard, in such cases. 



1 ALS, laHA. 

2 Lincoln's spelling seems to be "Hempston," but may be "Hempstow." La 
either case no appointment seems to have been made. 

[282] 



To Mark W. Delahay 1 

M. W. Delahay, Esq. Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir March 13. 1861 

You will start for Kansas before I see you again; and when I 
saw you a moment this morning, I forgot to ask you about some 
of the Kansas appointments, which I intended to do. If you care 
much about them, you can write, as I think I shall not make the 
appointments just yet. Yours in haste A. LINCOLN 

1 AL.S, DLC-HW. Delahay to Lincoln March 29 expressed hope that "... 
the appointment of Surveyor General for Kansas . . ." would not be made "un- 
til I can see you. . . ." (DLC-RTL.) . Delahay himself received the appoint- 
ment. 

To James R. Doolittle 1 

[c. March 13, 1861?] 

Please do not report on case of J. M. Richardson till you hear 
from me. Yours truly. A LINCOLN 

Hon. J. R. Doolittle. 

1 ALS, InFtWL. J. M. Richardson may have been John M. Richardson of 
Missouri, nominated by Lincoln as agent for the Choctaw and Chickasaw In- 
dians on March 13, 1861, whose appointment was never confirmed by the 
Senate. 

To William H. Seward 1 

Hon. W. H. Seward Executive Mansion March 13. 1861 

Dear Sir Gen. Cameron desires that Jacob S. Haldeman may 
be appointed Minister Resident, at Sweden & Norway; and I am 
willing to oblige him, if you see no objection. Your Obt. Servt. 

A. L.i3NrcouNr 

1 ALS, NAuE. Jacob S. Haldeman, president of the Harrisburg National 
Bank and formerly a member of the Pennsylvania legislature, received the ap- 
pointment. 

To William H. Seward 1 

Hon. W. H. Seward Executive Mansion. March 14. 1861 

My dear Sir Allow me to introduce Mr. F. Hassaurek, one of 
our best german Republican workers in America; residing at Cin- 
cinnati, and of whose character you can not be ignorant. Please 
give him an interview. Yours truly A. LIISTCOLIN" 

1 ALS, NAuE. Frederick Hassaurek, editor of the Cincinnati Hochivach- 
ter and sub-editor of the Ohio Staats Zeitung, was appointed minister to Ecua- 
dor. 

[283] 



To Jacob Collamer 1 

Hon. Jacob Collamer. March 15. 1861 

My dear Sir I am much relieved to learn that I have been mis- 
informed as to your having been offended. Yours very truly 



A 

l ALS, owned by Charles W. Olsen, Chicago, Illinois. On March 14, Colla- 
mer replied to Lincoln's note of March 12, supra, "I am entirely insensible 
that you have, in any way, offended me. I cherish no sentiment towards you 
but that of kindness & confidence. ..." (ALS, ibid ) 

Memoranda : 
Appointment of Mark H. Dunnell 1 

[c. March 15, 1861] 

Mr. Senator Fessenden, is anxious that Maine shall have the 
consul general of Canada & that Mark H. Dunnell shall be the 
man. 

The Vice President, and the United congressional delegation of 
Maine urge the appointment of Mark H. Dunnell as Consul Gen- 
eral for Canada, always bearing in mind that Mr. Fessenden, first 
of all, wishes Mr. Morse to be Consul to London 

1 AD, DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 277. Each memorandum is on a 
separate page. Lincoln nominated Mark H. Dunnell to be consul at Vera Cruz, 
March 22, 1861. 

Memorandum : 
Appointment of Freeman H. Morse 1 

[c. March 15, 1861] 

Mr. Senator Fessenden is exceedingly anxious that that \_sic~] 
Hon: Freeman H. Morse shall be consul to London & he says 
when he first mentioned Mr. Morse's name for that place, I said it 
was the first application. 

1 AD, DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 349. Lincoln nominated Morse 
for the consulship at London, March 20, 1861. 

To William H. Seward 1 

The Hon. Secretary of State Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir March 15. 1861 

Assuining it to be possible to now provision Fort-Sumpter, under 
all the circumstances, is it wise to attempt it? 

[284] 



MARCH 5, l86l 

Please give me your opinion, in writing, on this question. Your 
Obt. Servt. A. LrNrcoovr. 

i ALS copy, DLC-RTL. This letter, copied by Nicolay and signed by Lin- 
coln, was sent to each member of the cabinet. The several copies -which have 
been located are: to Bates, IHi; to Blair, DLC-Blair Collection; to Seward, 
NAuE; to Smith, MH; to Welles, A. Conger Goodyear, New York City. The 
lengthy replies in the Lincoln Papers are abridged as follows: (i) Seward, 
March 15 "If it were possible to peacefully provision Fort Sumter, of course 
I should answer, that it would be both unwise and inhuman not to attempt it. 
But the facts of the case are known to be, that the attempt must be made 
with the employment of military and marine force, which would provoke com- 
bat, and probably initiate a civil war. ... I would not provoke war in any 
way noiv. . . ." (2) Chase, March 16 ". . . . If the attempt will so inflame 
civil war as to involve an immediate necessity for the enlistment of armies . . . 
I cannot advise it. ... But it seems to me highly improbable that the attempt 
. . . will produce such consequences. ... I return, therefore, an affirmative 
answer. . . ." (3) Cameron, March 16 ". . . it would be unwise now to make 
such an attempt. ... I am greatly influenced by the opinions of the Army offi- 
cers who have expressed themselves on the subject, and -who seem to concur that it 
is, perhaps, now impossible to succor that fort, substantially, if at all. . . . All 
the officers within Fort Sumter, together with Generals Scott and Totten, ex- 
press this opinion. . . .*' (4) Welles, March 15 "The question has two as- 
pects, one military, the other political. The military gentlemen . . . represent 
that it would be unwise , . . and I am not disposed to controvert their opinions. 
... In a political view, I entertain doubts of the wisdom of the measure. . . , 
I do not . . . think it wise. . . ." (5) Smith, March 16 "AJter a careful con- 
sideration of the opinions of Gens. Scott and Totten, and also those of Com- 
modore String [h] am and Mr. Fox ... I have arrived at the conclusion that 
the probabilities are in favor of the success of the proposed enterprise, so far 
as to secure the landing of the vessels at the Fort, but .... it would not be 
wise under all the circumstances. . . .** (6) Blair, March 15 "... I submit 
the following considerations in favor of provisioning that Fort. The ambitious 
leaders of the late Democratic party have availed themselves ... to found 
a Military Government in the Seceding States. To the connivance of the late 
administration it is due alone that this Rebellion has been enabled to attain 
its present proportions. ... I ... agree that we must look to the people in 
these States for the overthrow of this rebellion. . . . How is this to be carried 
into effect? That it is by measures which will inspire respect for the power 
of the Government and the firmness of those who administer it does not ad- 
mit of debate. . . . The evacuation of Fort Sumpter . . . will convince the 
rebels that the administration lacks firmness and will therefore, ... so far 
from tending to prevent collision, will ensure it unless . . . all attempts are 
given up to maintain the authority of the United States. ..." (7) Bates, 
[March 16] "This is not a question of lawful right nor physical power, but 
of prudence & patriotism only. The right is ... unquestionable . . . the Gov- 
ernment has the power and the means. . . . The wisdom of the act must be 
tested by the value of the object to be gained, & by the hazards to be en- 
countered. ... I am willing to evacuate Fort Sumter, rather than be an ac- 
tive party in the beginning of civil war. ... If Fort Sumter must be evacu- 
ated . . . the more Southern forts, Pickens, Key West &c should, without 
delay, be put in condition of easy defence. . . . Upon the whole, I do not think 
it wise nou? to attempt to provision Fort Sumter. . . ." 



[285] 



Reply to Luis Molina, Minister from Nicaragua 1 

March 16, 1861 

Mr. MOLINA: I am happy to receive the letters you present, and 
to recognize you, sir, as Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Pleni- 
potentiary of Nicaragua near the United States. 

In conferring a higher rank upon you as a token of regard on 
the part of the Government and people of Nicaragua towards this 
country, they have done our Government and people an honor for 
which we are duly grateful, while they have also manifested an 
increased confidence in you, which we can attest is deserved, and 
thereby have done you a distinguished honor, upon which we con- 
gratulate you. 

On behalf of the United States I fully reciprocate towards your 
Government and people the kind wishes and friendly purposes you 
so generously express towards ours. 

Please communicate to his excellency the President of Nica- 
ragua my high esteem and consideration, and my earnest wish for 
his health, happiness, and long life. 

Be assured, sir, I do not allow myself to doubt that your public 
duties and social intercourse here will be so conducted as to be en- 
tirely acceptable to the Government and people of the United 
States. 

1 Washington Daily National Intelligencer, March 18, 1861. The same text, 
except for variations in punctuation, appeared in the New York Tribune and 
other papers. Luis Molina, 'who had represented "both Nicaragua and Costa Rica 
at Washington for several years, made a brief speech upon presenting the 
credentials accrediting him as envoy extraordinary and minister plenipoten- 
tiary. Hertz, II, 823, misdates Lincoln's reply as of March 17. 



To Winfield Scott 1 

[March 16, 1861] 

If Lieut. GenL Scott perceives no impropriety in my granting 
Mr. Hamilton's request, made within, I should be gratified to do 
it. Will GenL Scott please answer? Your Obt. Servt. A. 



1 ALS, DLC-Nicolay Papers. Lincoln's note is written on the back of a let- 
ter from Andrew J. Hamilton, retiring Union congressman from Texas, who 
requested that Lieutenant John C. Howard, suspended by court-martial in 
Washington Territory, be restored to his post. General Scott's answer is written 
below Lincoln's note: "The sentence was disapproved by the late President 
(without assigning a reason) & Lieut. Howard released from arrest that is, 
restored to duty. . . ." Howard resigned his commission, September 6, 1861. 
Hamilton was appointed brigadier general of volunteers and military governor 
of Texas in 1862. 

[286] 



To Winfield Scott 1 

Executive Mansion March 16. 1861 

I have examined, to some extent, this case of Major Henshaw, 
and have been brought to deeply sympathize -with him. He wishes 
to be appointed a Paymaster; and if, in the opinion of Gen. Scott, 
this can be done without impropriety, it would gratify me to do it. 
Your Obt. Servt. A. 



1 AL.S, RPB-Henshaw Papers. The note is written on the end leaf of the 
pamphlet, Proceedings of a General Court Martial . . . for the Trial of Brevet 
Major John C. Henshauf (New York, 1858). Leonard Swett to Lincoln, De- 
cember 26, 1860, endorsed by David Davis, sets forth John C. Henshaw's wish 
for reinstatement as paymaster. Major Henshaw had been court-martialed 
while stationed in Arkansas, on charges growing out of his refusal to use his 
troops to catch runaway slaves. Army regulations prevented his restoration to 
line service. Although no record of Scott's action in the case has been found, 
Henshaw was eventually appointed captain and assistant adjutant general, 
August 7, 1862, and became major and judge advocate February 29, 1864. See 
also Lincoln's memorandum, April 3, infra. 



To the Senate 1 

To the Senate: March 16, 1861 

The Senate has transmitted to me a copy of the Message sent 
by my predecessor to that Body on the 2ist. day of February last, 
proposing to take its advice on the subject of a proposition made 
by the British Government through its Minister here to refer the 
matter in controversy between that Government and the Govern- 
ment of the United States to the arbitrament of the Kong of Swe- 
den and Norway, the King of the Netherlands, or the Republic of 
the Swiss Confederation. 

In that Message, my predecessor stated that he wished to sub- 
mit to the Senate the precise questions following, namely: 

"Will the Senate approve a treaty referring to either of the 
Sovereign Powers above named the dispute now existing between 
the Governments of the United States and Great Britain concern- 
ing the boundary line between Vancouver's Island and the Amer- 
ican Continent? In case the referee shall find himself unable to 
decide where the line is by the description of it in the Treaty of 
15th. June, 1846, shall he be authorized to establish a line accord- 
ing to the treaty as nearly as possible? Which of the three Powers 
named by Great Britain as an arbiter shall be chosen by the 
United States?" 

I find no reason to disapprove of the course of my predecessor 
in this important matter, but, on the contrary, I not only shall 

[287] 



MARCH 6, l86l 

receive the advice of the Senate thereon cheerfully, but I respect- 
fully ask the Senate for their advice on the two [three?] questions 
before recited. ABRAHAM LUNTCOUNT. 

Washington, 1 6th March, 1861. 

1 DS, DNA RG 46, Senate 3/B B6. This message was referred to the com- 
mittee on foreign relations, and on March 19, Senator Sumner submitted a 
resolution that the dispute be submitted to the Republic of Switzerland as 
arbiter. On March 27, further consideration of the resolution was postponed 
to "the ad Monday of December next." (^Executive Journal, XI, 357). 



To Gideon Welles 1 

Hon. Gideon Welles Executive Mansion 

Dear Sir March 16/61 

The bearer (William) is a servant who has been with me for some 
time & in whom I have confidence as to his integrity and faithful- 
ness. He wishes to enter your service. The difference of color be- 
tween him & the other servants is the cause of our seperation. If 
you can give him employment you will confer a favour on Yours 
truly A. LINCOLN 

1 LS-F, ISLA. See Lincoln to "Whom it may concern," March. 7, supra. 



Endorsement: Jesse K. Dubois to Lincoln 1 

[c. March 17, 1861] 

Dubois, who writes this, is my particular friend; and while, 
possibly, the thing he wishes, can not be done, something else may. 

LI3NTCOL3NT. 

1 AES, DNA RG 48, Applications, Indian Agencies, Superintendent of In- 
dian Affairs (Northern), Box 1266. The endorsement seems to have been clipped 
from the envelope and pasted on the back of Dubois' letter of March 17, 
1861, requesting appointment of his son-in-law, James P. I/use, editor of the 
Lafayette, Indiana, Journal, as superintendent of Indian affairs for the North- 
ern Superintendency. Clark W. Thompson of Minnesota received the appoint- 
ment, however, and Luse later received the postmastership of Lafayette. See 
also Lincoln to Dubois, March 30, infra. 



Memorandum on Fort Sumter 1 

March i8[?] 1861 

Some considerations in favor of withdrawing the Troops from 
Fort Sumpter, by President Lincoln. 

[288] 



MARCH 8, l86l 

ist. The Fort cannot be permanently held without reinforce- 
ment. 

This point is too apparent too [szc] need proof 
The cutting off supplies and consequent starvation, not to 
mention disease, would compel surrender in a few months at far- 
thest, without firing a gun 

2 The Fort cannot now be re-inforced without a large arma- 
ment, involving of course a bloody conflict and great exasperation 
on both sides, and when re-inforced can only be held by sufficient 
number to garrison the post and to keep open communication with 
it by means of the harbor. 

3. The Fort in the present condition of affairs is of inconsider- 
able military value, for: It is not necessary for the Federal Gov- 
ernment to hold it in order to protect the City of Charleston from 
foreign invasion, nor: Is it available under existing circumstances 
for the purpose of collecting the revenue: and, It is difficult to see 
how the possession of the Fort by the Secessionists can be rendered 
a means of annoyance to the Federal Government. Every purpose 
for which the fort can now be made available would be better sub- 
served by Ships of War, outside the harbor. 

4 The abandonment of the Post would remove a source of irri- 
tation to the Southern people and deprive the secession movement 
of one of its most powerful stimulants. 

5 It would indicate both an independent and a conservative 
position on part of the new administration, and would gratify and 
encourage those, who while friendly to the Union are yet reluc- 
tant to see extreme measures pursued. 

6 It would tend to confound and embarrass those enemies of 
the Union both at the North and South who have relied on the 
cry of "Coercion" as a means of keeping up the excitement against 
the Republican Party. 

7 If the garrison should, while in an enfeebled condition be 
successfully attacked, or from want of proper supplies should be 
cut off by disuse the administration would be held responsible for 
it and this fact would be used by their opponents with great effect. 

8 The moral advantage to the Secessionists of a successful at- 
tack would be very great. 

Objections 

ist The danger of demoralizing the Republican Party by a 
measure which might seem to many to indicate timidity or in com- 
mon parlance, "want of pluck." 

That this may be the first impression is probable but if the 
measure is justified upon the double ground of the small import- 

[289] 



MARCH 18, l86l 

ance of the post in a military point of view and the desire to con- 
ciliate wherever this can be safely done a second thought will 
discover the wisdom of the course, and increase rather than dimin- 
ish the confidence of the party in its leaders. 

zd The danger of the movement being construed by the Seces- 
sionists as a yielding from necessity, and in so far a victory on 
their part 

1 Copy, DLC- Welles Papers. There is some uncertainty about this three-page 
manuscript. It is not in Lincoln's handwriting. It may be a copy of a memo- 
randum submitted to the cabinet, or a resume of conflicting views as Lincoln 
orally presented them to the cabinet. Although the first and third pages are 
dated March 18, 1861, this date seems to have been added later. There is no 
Lincoln autograph in the Lincoln Papers that resembles the manuscript, but 
its presence in the Welles Papers seems to justify its inclusion here. Pre- 
sumably Lincoln was recapitulating the opinions of the several members of the 
cabinet submitted on March 15 and 16 in response to Lincoln's letter of March 
15, supra. 



To Edward Bates 1 

Hon. Attorney Genl. Executive Mansion March 18, 1861 

A marshal for Kansas is needed at once; and unless the papers 
in your office show the appointment of some other person to be 
more proper, mate out and send me a blank for James L. Mc- 
Dowell. Yours &c A. 



1 ALS, owned by Mrs. R. T. Kellogg, Silver City, New Mexico. James L. Mc- 
Dowell, mayor of Leavenworth (1859), received the appointment. 



To Edward Bates 1 

Executive Mansion March 18. 1861. 

Sir: I shall be obliged if you will give me your opinion in writ- 
ing whether under the Constitution and existing laws, the Execu- 
tive has power to collect duties on ship-board, off-shore, in cases 
where their collection in the ordinary way is, by any cause, ren- 
dered impracticable. This would include the question of lawful 
power to prevent the landing of dutiable goods, unless the duties 
were paid. Your Obt. Servt. A. LirqrcoLisr 

The Honourable 
Attorney General 

1 LS, DLC-RTL. See the similar letters to Chase and Welles, infra. Bates' 
reply is not in the Lincoln Papers. 

[290] 



Draft of a Proposed Order to Establish 
a Militia Bureau 1 

Executive Mansion 
To the Secretary of War: March 8th 1861. 

Sir: You will favor me by issuing an order detailing Lieut. 
Ephraim E Ellsworth, of the First Dragoons, for special duty as 
Adjutant and Inspector General of Militia for the United States, 
and in so far as existing laws will admit, charge him with the 
transaction, under your direction, of all business pertaining to the 
Militia, to be conducted as a separate bureau, of which Lieut. 
Ellsworth will be chief, with instructions to take measures for 
promoting a uniform system of organization, drill, equipment, &c. 
&c. of the U. S. Militia, and to prepare a system of 2 drill for Light 
troops, adapted for self -instruction, for distribution to the Militia 
of the several States. You will please assign him suitable office 
rooms, furniture &c. and provide him with a clerk and messenger, 
and furnish him such facilities in the way of printing, stationery, 
access to public records, &c. as he may desire for the successful 
prosecution of his duties; and also provide 3 in such manner as 4 
may be most convenient and proper, for a monthly payment to Lieut 
Ellsworth, for this extra duty, sufficient to make his pay 5 equal 
that of a Major of Cavalry. Your obt. Servt. 

1 Copy, DLC-RTL. Tlie order was submitted with Lincoln to Bates, infra. 
The original of this proposed order is not in the Lincoln Papers and has not 
been located elsewhere. The text given by Tracy, pp. 177-78,, may have been 
prepared from Lincoln's original, and major variations as printed there are 
given in the succeeding footnotes. Presumably this order was not sent to the 
War Department after Bates' unfavorable report, 

2 Tracy prints the remainder of this sentence as follows: "instruction for the 
militia, to be distributed to the several states." 

3 Tracy prints "if you please" after "provide." 

4 Tracy prints "will best answer the purpose," instead of "may be most con- 
venient and proper." 

5 Tracy prints "pay and emoluments" instead of "pay." 

To Edward Bates 1 

Executive Mansion March 18. 1861 

Will the Attorney General please give his opinion in writing 
whether the Executive has any lawful authority to make such an 
order as the foregoing, and return this paper, with the answer, to 

me? A. 



1 ALS, DLC-RTL. The draft of Lincoln's order, supra., was enclosed with this 
letter. Bates replied on April 18 that in his opinion the president had not the 

[291] 



MARCH l8-> l86l 

power to establish the bureau, "without Congressional enactment" and "an ex- 
plicit appropriation by Congress ... to provide the compensation proposed. 
. . ." (Copy, DLC-RTL). Apparently the order was never sent to Cameron 
The original of Bates' reply is not in the Lincoln Papers. 

To Salmon E Chase 1 

Executive Mansion March 18, 1861 

Sir I shall be obliged if you will inform me whether any 
goods, wares and merchandize, subject by law to the payment of 
duties, are now being imported into the United States without such 
duties being paid, or secured according to law. And if yea, at 
what place or places? and for what cause do such duties remain 
unpaid, or [un] secured? 

I will also thank you for your opinion whether, as a matter of 
fact, vessels off shore could be effectively used to prevent such 
importation, or to enforce the payment or securing of the duties. 

If yea, what number, and description of vessels, in addition to 
those already in the Revenue service would be requisite? Your 
Obt. Servt. A. LINCOLN 

Hon: Sec. of Treasury 

1 ALS, CSmH; LS copy, DLC-RTL. Chase replied under date of March 
1861, that he had no official information of illegal importations, but that there 
were no customs officers south of North Carolina, Tennessee, and Arkansas, 
and consequently no reports. He thought that offshore vessels could execute the 
revenue laws, but that all of the eleven vessels in service would have to be 
rearmed, and since only one was a steamer, at least three of the others should 
be replaced by steam vessels. In addition six storage ships and naval protec- 
tion would be needed (DLC-RTL) . 

To William H. Seward 1 

Hon. Sec. of State Executive Mansion March 18. 1861 

My dear Sir I believe it is a necessity with us to make the ap- 
pointments I mentioned last night that is, Charles F. Adams to 
England, William L. Dayton to France, George P. Marsh to Sar- 
dinia, and Anson Burlingame to Austria. These gentlemen all have 
my highest esteem, but no one of them is originally suggested by 
me except Mr. Dayton. Mr. Adams I take because you suggested 
him, coupled with his eminent fitness for the place. Mr. Marsh 
and Mr. Burlingame I take because of the intense pressure of their 
respective states, and their fitness also. 

The objection to this card is that, locally they are so huddled 
up three being in New England, and two from a single state. I 
have considered this, and will not shrink from the responsibility. 
This being done leaves but five full missions undisposed of 

[292] 



MARCH 1 g, l86l 

Russia, China, Brazil, Peru, & Chili. And then, what about Carl 
Schurz? or, in other words, what about our german friends? 

Shall we put the card through, and arrange the rest afterwards? 

What say you? Your Obt. Servt. A, LiisrcoLisr 

1 A3LS, NAuE. There is no reply from Seward in the Lincoln Papers, 
but the appointments of Charles Francis Adams, William L. Dayton, George 
P. Marsh, and Carl Schurz were made as Lincoln lists them. Anson Burlin- 
game, being unacceptable to the Austrian government because of his opinions 
on Hungary and Sardinia, was appointed to China instead. 

Memorandum to William H. Seward 1 

[March 18, 1861] 

By some omission I failed to send the inclosed recommendations 
to the State Department. 'Would a consideration of them affect the 
conclusion of the Secretary, as to who shall be Secretary in Col- 
orado, or Nevada? LmcoiLisr. 

1 ADS, DN"A RG 59, Appointments, Box 355. The recommendations were 
for James W. Nye, who was appointed governor of Nevada. 

To Gideon Welles 1 

Executive Mansion March 18, 1861 

Sir I shall be obliged if you will inform me what amount of 
Naval force you could at once place at the control of the Revenue 
service. And also, whether at some distance of time you could so 
place an additional force; and how much? and at what time? Your 
Obt. Servt. A. LnsrcoLisr 

Hon. Sec. of Navy. 

i ALS, DNA WR 3STB RG 45, Executive letters, No. 47; US, DLC-RTL. Welles 
replied March 20 that twelve vessels would be put at control of the revenue 
service, but that the amount of force which could be so disposed in the future 
would depend on the number of men legally allowed to the Navy. Four vessels 
could be withdrawn from foreign service within three months. There were fif- 
teen vessels not in commission. Seven vessels could be made available for west 
coast service (DLC-RTL). See Lincoln's letters to Chase and Bates of this date, 
supra. 

To William H. Seward 1 

Executive Mansion March 19. 1861 

Messrs Senators Simmons & Anthony wish John R Bartlett to 
be Minister to Rome. They are anxious on behalf of Rhode Island, 

1 AL, DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 224. Senators from Rhode Island, 
James F. Simmons and Henry B. Anthony, had recommended John R. Bartlett 
of Providence, secretary of state for Rhode Island. Bartlett remained in office 
as secretary of state until 18 /a. 

[293] 



To Whom It May Concern 1 

Whom it may concern Executive Mansion March 19. 1861 

I did see and talk with Master George Evans Patten, last May, 
at Springfield, Illinois. Respectfully A LINCOLN 

1 ALS-F, ISLA. No letter from George Evans Patten is in the Lincoln Papers, 
and he has not been identified. One infers from Lincoln's note, however, that 
the boy wanted proof of his acquaintance, perhaps to silence skeptical friends. 



Memorandum on Appointments to Territories 1 

March 20, 1861 

Titus C. Wetmore, 2 informal delegate from Colorado, and Cope- 
land Townsend, 3 of Colorado, formerly of Wisconsin, call this 
20th. March and recommend for 

Governor William Larrimer, 4 Col. 
Secretary D. M. Kelsey 5 
C.[hief] J.[ustice] 

1 asso. T. C. Wetmore Col. 

2 do 

Atty. 

Marshall, Cop eland Townsend, Col. 

(ought to have been P.M. at Denver ) 
Surveyor. 



/Governor. 
State \Secretary 

Surveyor GenL 

Chief Justice 
Associate J. 
Do. Do 
Attorney 
Marshal 



Governor. 
Secretary 
Surv. GenL 
C. J. 
i Asso. 



2 D. 

Atty 

Marshal. 



Colorado Terrtory 

William Gilpin, of Colorado 
Lewis L. Weld, " 

David P. Hollo way 6 la. 

Francis M. Case, O 

Benjamin F. Hall N. Y. Seiv. 

S. Newton Pettis Pa. Cam. 

Charles Lee Armour Md. Bliss 

Theodore D. Edwards. Ky. 

Copeland Townsend. Col. 

Dacota 



William Jayne 7 
John Hutchinson 
George D. Hill 8 
Philemon Bliss 
Allen A. Burton 



L. P. Williston 9 
H. M. Vaile 

W. F. Shaffer 

[294] 



of Ills. 

of Kan. 

Mich. 

O. Wade, Chase. 

Ky. Speed & Clay 

Anderson 

Adams 

Harlan 
Pa. 
Kan Gilpin 

& [illegible] 
Ter. 



MARCH 20, l86l 

[John K. Hord] 10 Asks now to be Judge of either Territory, 
where not yet filled. March 27, 1861 



Governor 
Secretary 
Surveyor General. 



C. J. 

1 Asso. 

2 Asso. 
Atty 
Marshal. 



C. J. 

x 



Nevada. 

James W. Nye 11 N. "Y. 

Orion Clemens 12 Mo Bates 

J. W. North Min. 

Interior no application 13 

George Turner. 14 O. 

Gorden N. Mott California, Baker. 

Horatio Jones Mo. 

Benjamin Browker N. H Hale. 

David Bayles. Mo. 

Board of Pattent Appeal. 

John M. Hodges Vermont 

George Harding Pa 

Thomas C. Theaper O. 

Judges in Nebraska 

William Pitt Kellogg His. 

Sam Milligan Term Johns. Eth. 15 



1 AD, DLC-RTL. These three pages in. Lincoln's autograph and one page of 
recommendations (not reproduced) for John K. Hord, bearing Lincoln's en- 
dorsement as reproduced, were apparently Lincoln's summary of territorial of- 
fices and prospective appointees, as of March 20-27. 

2 Titus C. Wetmore, formerly a hotel keeper at Malta, Illinois, had migrated 
to Colorado in 1860. His letter in the Lincoln Papers, written f rom "Washington, 
January 17, 1861, indicates that he was a delegate of the United Mining Dis- 
trict, Rocky Mountains. 

3 Copeland Townsend, formerly of Oconomowoc, "Wisconsin, received the ap- 
pointment as marshal of Colorado. 

4 "William Larimer, a native of Pennsylvania and one of the founders of 
Denver, Colorado. 

5 D. M. Kelsey has not been identified, but did not receive the appointment. 

6 The names of Holloway of Indiana and Case were crossed out by Lincoln. 

7 "J. M. North Minn-" and "Nathaniel G. Wilson" were deleted and "Wil- 
liam Jayne" inserted. 

8 "Francis M. Case" and Lysander Cutler Wise" were deleted and "George 
D. Hill Mich " inserted. 

9 "James E. M[echen?] Mich." was deleted and "L. P. Williston Pa." in- 
serted. 

10 A page, not in Lincoln's handwriting, listing the numerous public officials 
of Ohio 'who recommended John K. Hord, bears Lincoln's endorsement as re- 
produced. 

11 "Rufus King Wise" deleted and "James "W. Nye N. Y." inserted. 

12 w. L. Brown. la." deleted and "Orion Clemens Mo Bates" inserted 

13 This line has been crossed out, 

14 "Sam Milligan Tenn. Johnson & Eth" deleted and "George Turner. O" in- 
serted. 15 Senator Andrew Johnson and Representative Emerson Etheridge 

[295] 



To Robert Irwin 1 

Private 

Robert Irwin, Esq Washington D. C. 

My dear Sir: March 20. 1861 

I am scared about your friend Dennison. The place is so fiercely 
sought by, and for, others, while, except what has come through 
you, his name is not mentioned at all, that I fear appointing him 
will appear too arbitrary on my part. I have made no appoint- 
ments at the city as yet; but it has pained me that among the 
scores of names urged, his has not occurred once. Your tired 
friend A. Lmcousr 

1 ALS, IHi Robert Irwin to Lincoln, February 27, 1861, asked for the ap- 
pointment of attorney George Denison of New York as naval officer of the 
port of New York, and an undated note requests "for the last time . . . cannot 
you consistently give my Friend Denison the appointment he has solicited. 
. . ." (DLC-RTL). For further developments in this appointment, see Lincoln 
to Chase, May 16 and 18, infra. 



To Donald McClennan 1 

Donald McClennan Esq Executive Mansion 

Dear Sir; March 20. 1861 

I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your favour of 
Jan 3 ist and the accompanying shawles and blankets presented by 
you through the Hon John Satterlee. 

Permit me to express my sincere gratitude for the kind feelings 
that prompted your present & my gratification at the f orward state 
of California manufactures which those articles exhibit. Your obt 
Ser 

1 Df, DLC-RTL. The draft is in John Hay's handwriting Donald McClennan 
wrote, January 31, 1861, "I desire to present ... an union grey shawl, made 
of California wool and the first manufactured in this State, together with a 
pair of family blankets of our manufacture, at the Chrysopolis Mills, Mission 
Dolores San Francisco . . ." (DLC-RTL). 



To Caleb B. Smith 1 

Hon. Sec. of Interior Executive Mansion March 20. 1861 

Please make out and send blank appointments for all Indian 
places, to serve in Wisconsin, in favor of the persons unitedly rec- 
ommended by the Wisconsin Congressional delegation. 

And in like manner, all in Minnesota, in favor of the persons 

[296] 



MARCH 22, l86l 

unitedly recommended by the Minnesota Republican delegation in 
congress. Of course these relate to Executive appointments. Yours 
truly A. 



* ALS, DNA NR RG 48, Appointments, Indian Agencies, Miscellaneous, Box 
1268. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir March 21. 1861 

Thomas J. Pickett, the bearer of this, and an Illinois State Sen- 
ator, resides at the City of Rock-Island, in that State, and in the 
immediate vicinity of the Island of that name. The Island belongs 
to the U.S; and Mr. Pickett thinks there is an agency for it, in 
charge of your Department, worth some $700. If this be true, I 
wish Mr. Pickett could have the agency. Yours very truly 

A 



1 ALS, IHi. Pickett received the agency of the Island of Rock Island. 

To William EL Seward 1 

[March 21, 1861?] 
What says Gov. Seward to making the appointment mentioned 
within. 



1 AES, JNTAuE. Lincoln's undated endorsement is 'written on the back of a 
letter from Winfield Scott and Joseph G. Totten to Montgomery Blair, March 
21, 1861, recommending appointment of General Joseph G. Swift as postmaster 
at Geneva, New York. William Johnson, rather than Swift, received the ap- 
pointment. 



To Gideon Welles 1 

Hon. Sec. of Navy Executive Mansion March 22. 1861 

Sir: I -understand there is a vacancy in the office of Engineer in 
Chief of the Navy, which I shall have to fill by appointment. Will 
you please avail yourself of all the means in your power for de- 
termin[ing] and present me the name of [the] best man for the 
service [ ? ] of other circumstances. Yours &c A. 



1 ALS-P, ISLA. The manuscript is "burned at the edges. Restorations are by 
the editors. There is no reply from Welles in the Lincoln Papers, but Benja- 
min F. Isherwood of New York was appointed. 

[297] 



Endorsement: Meredith Helm to Lincoln 1 

I wish Mr. Thomas Mustin, and Mr. Jones, named within, may 
retain their places, for the present, at least. A LINCOLN 

March 25. 1861. 

1 AES, RPB. Dr. Meredith Helm of Springfield, Ilinois, wrote a letter on 
March 20, 1861, introducing "Thomas Mustin, and Mr Thos. Jones, the 
former my brother in law, the latter his son in law," and asking that they be 
permitted to retain their respective offices. Mustin held a clerkship in the 
fifth auditor's office and Jones a clerkship in the census office. 



Endorsements: Caleb B. Smith to Lincoln 1 

We demand that the appointment named within be made at 

Once. EDGAR COWAN 

March 25, 1861. JOHN COVODE 

Let it be done. LINCOLN 

i-AES, DNA RG 48, Appointments, Indian Agencies, Box 1274. Both en- 
dorsements are in Lincoln's handwriting, the first bearing signatures of Sen- 
ator Edgar Cowan and Representative John Covode of Pennsylvania. Smith's 
letter concerned the appointment of Walter A. Burleigh of Pennsylvania to 
the Yankton Sioux Indian Agency. Burleigh was appointed. 



To William H. Seward 1 

[March 25, 1861] 

Senator Grimes wishes A. L. Wolff made consul to Basle in 
Switzerland. 



DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 406. August L. Wolff of Iowa 
received the appointment. 



To James W. Grimes and James Harlan 1 

[c. March 26, 1861?] 

Messrs. Grimes & Harlan. Would your friend, Sanders be Sur- 
veyor General of Nevada? Yours truly A. LINCOLN 
P. S answer at once. 

1 ALS, DLC. Lincoln's note is undated, and no reply has been found. On 
March 26, 1861, Alvin Saunders of Iowa was nominated by Lincoln to be 
Governor of Nebraska. The Senate confirmed the nomination on March 27. 

[298] 



To the Senate 1 

March 26, 1861 

To the Senate of the United States. I have received a copy of a 
resolution of the Senate passed on the 25th instant requesting me, 
if in my opinion not incompatible with the public interest to com- 
municate to the Senate the despatches of Major Robert Anderson 
to the War Department during the time he has been in command 
at Fort Sumter. 

On examining the correspondence thus called for I have with 
the highest respect for the Senate come to the conclusion that at 
the present moment the publication of it would be inexpedient. 
Washington, 26th. March, 1861. [ABRABCAM: 



i Copy, DLC-RTL,. Labeled "(Copy)'* in Lincoln's autograph, the document is 
otherwise in Seward's handwriting and is without signature. The original has 
not been found, and the text does not appear in the Senate 'Executive Journal. 
The Congressional G-lobe, March 29, 1861, prints the same text as in the copy, 
under proceedings of March 27, 1861 (p. 1512). The text printed by Nicolay 
and Hay (VI, 225-26) contains minor verbal variations ("the resolution," "of 
Fort Sumter," "On examination of"), which may represent the wording of 
the original. 



To Edward Bates 1 

Hon. Atty. General Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir March 27, 1861 

Senator Foote sends me word that the Vermont delegation de- 
sires George Howe to be District Attorney; and C C. E Baldwin to 
be Marshal for Vermont. The initials I can not help. I send them 
as sent to me. Send me the blank appointments. Yoiors &c 

A. 



i ALS owned by Mrs. R. T. Kellogg, Silver City, New Mexico. C. C. P. Bald- 
win of Bradford, and George Howe of Brattleboro, Vermont, received their re- 
spective appointments. 

To Edward Bates 1 

[c. March 27, 1861] 

Will the Attorney General give the bearers of this, an audience, 
and examine this petition as soon as possible. A. LINCOLN 

1 AES, DNA RG 204, IL S. Pardon Attorney, A 361. Endorsement on a pe- 
tition March 27, 1861, from a delegation of the Chidkasaw Tribe of Indians, 
asking a respite of six months in the execution of Reyburn Porter and Billy 
Jimmy of the Chictasaw Tribe, convicted in November, 1860, of the murder of 
two white men. 

[299] 



Memorandum : 
Appointment of Thomas P. Campbell 1 

March 27, 1861 

On this 27th. of March 1861 Hon. Mr. Blair of Pa. calls and 
presses that Thomas P. Campbell Esq. of his District shall be con- 
sul to Glasgow, or have some other eligible appointment. Mr. Blair 
says his District does a large share of the voting, and never receives 
any thing. Therefore he is very anxious in this matter. 

1 AD, DLC-RTL. Representative Samuel S. Blair's recommendation of 
Thomas P. Campbell of Huntington, Pennsylvania, was not followed. James S. 
Prettyman of Delaware received the appointment. 

Reply to Joseph Bertinatti 1 

March 27, 1861 

CHEVALIER RERTIJNTATTI: With a degree of pleasure no less than 
that which you express in presenting it, I receive and accept the 
letter of his Majesty, your august Sovereign, which accredits you 
as his Minister Resident near this Government. 

"While I hold it to be the duty of the United States not to inter- 
fere with the differences of foreign Governments and countries, I 
trust I may, without offence to any, congratulate your Sovereign 
and yourself upon the high position which Sardinia holds in the 
scale of nations. I hope, too, that whatever has been or shall be 
done may result in the augmented prosperity and happiness of 
the people concerned. 

Please assure your august Sovereign that his good wishes for our 
country are reciprocated by us for his, and that it shall be our 
constant care to maintain the friendly relations now happily ex- 
isting between the two. 

Chevalier Bertinatti, your personal promotion is a subject of 
satisfaction to the Government of the United States. 

1 Washington Daily National Intelligencer , March. 28, 1861. Lincoln replied 
to a brief speech, by Chevalier Bertinatti of Sardinia on presenting his cre- 
dentials of promotion from consul to minister. 

To Hiram Barney 1 

Hon. Hiram Barney Washington 

My dear Sir: March 29, 1861 

Please come here. I think I can make up the New- York card 
better after having a talk with you. Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS-P, ISLA.. Barney was a prominent New York City attorney who was 
appointed collector of the Port of New York. 

[300] 



Memorandum: Edward D. Baker's Recom- 
mendations for California Appointments 1 

March 29, 1861 

It Is stated that Col. Baker's recommendations for California 
would be judicious and satisfactory, by, 

Thomas Fitch Walter S. Denio Rod. Matthewson 

Geo W. Wright Wm. H. Stevens [Roderick Matheson] 

Chas W. Rand Capt. [Frank] Folger S[amuel] H. Parker 

D. J. Staples J. C. Birsaye [Birdsye]A. J. Butler 

*AD, DLC-RTL. The envelope endorsed by Lincoln "California/ Baker's 
backers & Cand./ (Partial only)" also contains a small slip, not in Lincoln's 
handwriting, listing "California/ Collecter Naval agent, Sam Bell. Naval offi- 
cer Willard B. Farwell. Superintendent of the Mint, Robt. I Stevens." 



To Gideon Welles and Simon Cameron 1 

Executive Mansion 
Honorable Secretary of the Navy [War], March. 29, 1861 

Sir: I desire that an expedition, to move by sea, be got ready to 
sail as early as the 6th. of April next, the whole according to mem- 
orandum attached; and that you co-operate with the Secretary of 
War [the Navy] for that object. Your Obedient Servant 

A. 



[Enclosure] 2 
Navy Dept. 

Stairs Pocahontas at Norfolk, Pawnee at Washington, and Rev- 
enue Cutter Harriet Lane at N. York to be ready [under sailing 
orders] for sea with one months stores [stores, etc. for one month] . 
Three hundred seamen [men] to be [kept] ready for leaving the 
[departure from on board] receiving ship at N. York [for depar- 
ture from on board the receiving-ships at New York] . 

War Dept. 

Two hundred men at N. York ready to leave garrison one 
years stores to be put in a portable form. [Two hundred men to be 
ready to leave Governor's Island in New York. Supplies for 
twelve months for one hundred men to be put in portable shape, 
ready for instant shipping. A large steamer and three tugs con- 
ditionally engaged.] 



, ISLA; NH, VI, 226-27. Although the original manuscript of the 
to Cameron as printed by Nicolay and Hay has not been located, the copy 
to Welles, with enclosure, is available. The variations in wording in the 

[301] 



MARCH 3O? l86l 

Cameron copy as printed by NIcolay and Hay are given in brackets At the 
cabinet meeting on March 29, Lincoln requested written opinions on the ex- 
pedition. Seward and Smith opposed, while Welles, Chase, Bates, and Blair 
concurred. The written opinions of Seward, Welles, Smith, Chase, and Bates 
are in the Lincoln Papers, but the opinion of Blair (printed in NH, VI, 230) is 
not, and no opinion of Cameron is of record on this date. 

2 The enclosure with the Welles letter is not in Lincoln's handwriting. 

To Jesse K. Dubois 1 

Hon. J. K. Dubois: Washington, 

My dear Sir March 30. 1861 

I was nearly as sorry as you can be at not being able to give Mr. 
Luce the appointment you desired for him. Of course I could have 
done it; but it "would have been against the united, earnest, and, I 
add, angry protest of the republican delegation of Minnesota, in 
winch state the office is located. So far as I understand, it is un- 
precedented, [to] send an officer into a state against the wishes of 
the members of congress of the State, and of the same party. Your 
friend as ever A, 



1 ALS, IHi. Dubois to Lincoln, March 27, 1861, expressed disappointment 
that John P. Luse, his son-in-law, failed to receive the appointment as Northern 
superintendent of Indian affairs for Minnesota: **MLy heart ivas set on this ap- 
plication for him, as in his appointment I could have transferred my dying 
daughter from the Wabash Valley to the healthy climate of Minessotta and 
perhaps prolonged her life. . . ." (DLC-RTX). See Lincoln's endorsement on 
letter from Dubois, (c. March 17, 1861), supra. 

Endorsement on Petition 
Concerning California Appointments 1 

March 30, 1861 

This paper is presented the 3Oth. of March 1861, by Mr. Jos. A. 
Nunes, as spokesman of about fiftyfive Californians, being present, 
stating it to be the expression of a majority of California Repub- 
licans now in Washington. 

i AE, DLC-RTL. Signed "by Joseph A. Nunes, president of the California 
Republican conventions of 1856 and 1860, and fifty-four other California Re- 
publicans, the petition of March 28, 1861, requests that the president consult 
Leland Stanford, Gordon N. Mott, J. "W. Simonton, Charles Watrous, and John 
Satterlee in regard to federal appointments in California. Lincoln's envelope 
endorsement reads: "California/ Document of the 55." 

To Honorable Secretary 1 

Hon: Secretary Executive Mansion March 30. 1861 

The bearer of this, Alexander R. McKee, is a brother-in-law, of 
the late Col. John Hardin of Illinois, and is an out, and out Repub- 

[302] 



MARCH 30, l86l 

lican. He resides in Kentucky, as he ever has done. I think I am 
not mistaken in saying he is popular with all Kentuckians. He de- 
sires a place in one of the Departments, and I -wish he could have 
it. Yours truly A. 



1 ALS, owned by William H. Townsend, Lexington, Kentucky. This letter of 
introduction produced an appointment for McKee to the consulship at Panama. 
Alexander R, McKee had served for many years as clerk of court at Lancaster, 
Kentucky. 

To Caleb B. Smith 1 

[c. March 30, 1861] 

Comodore Gregory, Comd. by Mr. Jefferson, Jany, 16. i86i 2 
presents himself and presses that his son, named within, be re- 
tained as agent for the Poncas tribe, in Dakota. 

1 AE, DISTA NR RG 48, Applications, Indian Agencies, Box 1272. Captain 
Francis H. Gregory to Lincoln, March 30, 1861, requests the retention of his 
son John S. Gregory as agent for the Ponca Tribe. 

2 Lincoln's inadvertent error; Gregory was commissioned January 16, 1809. 

To John T. Stuart 1 

PRIVATE 

Dear Stuart: Washington, March 30, 1861 

Cousin Lizzie 2 shows me your letter of the 2 /th. The question of 
giving her the Springfield Post-office troubles me. You see I have 
already appointed William Jayne a territorial governor, and Judge 
Trumbulls brother 3 to a Land-office. "Will it do for me to go on 
and justify the declaration that Trumbull and I have divided out 
all the offices among our relatives? Dr. Wallace, you know, is 
needy, and looks to me; and I personally owe him much. 

I see by the papers, a vote is to be taken as to the Post-office. 4 
Could you not set up Lizzie and beat them all? She, being here, 
need know nothing of it, & therefore there would be no indelicacy 
on her part. Yours as ever A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, owned by heirs of Stuart Brown, Springfield, Illinois. Stuart replied 
April 3, "... I would not let the case of Cousin Lizzie trouble me if I were 
you. . * ." and William Butler and Jesse K. Dubois advised on March 25, that 
the president should do nothing until after the city election and that he not sanc- 
tion election by the people at all (DLC-RTL) . The incumbent John M. Lindsay 
continued in office until August 16, when John Armstrong was installed. 

2 Elizabeth Todd Grimsley. 

3 Benjamin M. Trumbull was appointed receiver of the land office at Omaha, 
Nebraska. 

4 Although the advisability of an election was discussed in the Illinois State 
Journal, none was held. 

[303] 



Memorandum: California Appointments 1 

[c. April i, 1861] 

Rabe thinks we should ask the advice of Col. Keys (Gen. Scott's 
Sec) about appointments. 

1 AE, DLC-RTL. Lincoln's endorsement is written on an undated note from 
William Rabe, enclosed with a letter from Rabe" dated April i, 1861, listing 
appointments which Rabe recommended in California. Dr. William Rabe, ap- 
pointed marshal for the northern district of California, was a druggist at San 
Francisco and secretary of the California state Republican committee. 



Memoranda on Federal Appointments 1 

[c. April i, 1861] 
Baltimore Maryland. 2 

Collector Henry W. Hoffman. 

Dep. 

Surveyor of P William L. Marshall 
Naval Officer Francis S. Cockran [Corkran]. 

Dep, 
Appraiser GenL Frederick Schley. 

1. Appraiser Charles P. Montague 

2, Do. Joseph F, Meredith 
Navy Agent Wm. Pinckney Ewing 
Post-Master William H. PurnelL 
Attorney 

Marshal Washington Bonifant. 

About appointments in California, 3 

Consult Leland Stanford & Eugene L. Sullivan. 

California* 

Sacramento 

Collector L. H. Foote $3430.00 

Monterey. 

Collector John F. Porter "3055.52 

Sonoma. 

Collector Seth M. Swain. "3165.71 

Santa Barbara 

Collector Samuel B. Brinkerhoff 5 

San Joaquin 

Collector S. W. Sperry. "3174-55 

1 AD, DLC-RTL. These memoranda are scattered among the Lincoln Papers, 
but seem to be contemporary and have been grouped together for convenience. 
The number of the document in the RTL is given in a footnote to each. 

2 RTL, 9523- 

s RTL, 9532. * RTL, 13639-1364.1-. 

5 The omitted Santa Barbara item is written in the left-hand margin. 

[304] 



APRIL 1, l86l 



San Diego 

Collector 
San Pedro 

Surveyor 
San Francisco 

Collector 

Dep. & And. 

Dep. 

Dep. 

Appraiser Genl. 

Appraiser, 
do. 

Naval Officer 

Surveyor 



Mint 



Navy 



Superintendent 

Treasurer 

Melter & 

Assayer. 

Comr 

Navy Agent 



Joshua Sloan. 
Oscar Macy. 
Ira P. RanMn 



Samuel J. Bridge. 
Benj. W. Mudge. 
John P. Zane. 



Robert J. Stevens 
David W. Cheeseman 6 
Walter S. Denio 
Conrad Wiegand 
William Schmolz 



$2250.00 
"3000.00 

"7900.00 
"3125.00 
"3125.00 
"3125,00 
"3125.00 
"3125.00 
"3125.00 
"6250.00 
"5625.00 

"4500.00 
"4500.00 
"3000.00 
"3000.00 
"3000.00 



Judicial Department 



Northern District. 

Attorney. 

Marshal. 
Southern District 

Attorney. 

Marshal. 

83 Surveyor General 
85-86 San Francisco L. O 

Register. 

Receiver. 
Los Angeles L. O 

Register 

Receiver. 
Maryville L,. O. 

Register. 

Receiver. 
Humboldt L. O 

Register. 

Receiver. 
Stockton L. O 

Register, 

Receiver. 
Visalia L. O 

Register. 

Receiver. 



William H. Sharp 
William Rabe. 

[Kimball H.] Dimmick 
Henry D. Barrows 

$4500.00 

George B. Tingley "3000.00 

Royal H. Waller. "3000.00 

Antonio Maria Pico. "3000.00 

Lewis Sperry. "3000.00 

A. J. Snyder. "3000.00 

J. Compton. "3000.00 

John M. Eddy. "3000.00 

'William H. Pratt. "3000.00 

George D. Webster "3000.00 

G. C. Havens. "3000.00 

Henry W. Briggs. "3000.00 

George M. Gerrish. "3000.00 



e The name has been written over another name which is illegible. 

[305] 



APRIL 



l86l 



95 California Indian Dept. 

North. Superintendency (S.F). Geo. M. Hanson $4000.00 
South do Miner Frisby, Jr. 

Klamath. Sub-Agency. ^1500.00 

Gal. Agency (Norm Lecker) "3000.00 

Sub- do- (Mendocino) "1500.00 

Sub- do "1500.00 
California Indian Dept. cont. 

Tejon Agency $3000.00 

Klamath Agency "3000.00 

Nebraska & Kansas 7 

Land Dept. cont. 

Dakota City L. O 
Register 
Receiver 

91 Indian Dept. 

Superintendent (St. L) 2000.00 

Blackfeet Agency 1500,00 

Upper Mo. Agency 1500.00 

Yancton Sioux Agency 1500.00 

Upper Platte Agency 1500.00 

Omaha Agency 1500.00 

Ottoe & Mo. A 1500.00 

Pawnee A 1500.00 

Kickapoo A 1500.00 

Delaware A 1500.00 

Shaw. <fe Wy. A 1500.00 

Pottawatamie A 1500.00 

Great Nemaha A. 1500.00 

Sac & Fox A 1500.00 

Kansas A 1500.00 

Osage R. A. 1500.00 

Nebraska 8 

Governor Nebraskan 

Secretary 

C. J. 

Ass. J. 

Ass. J. 

Attorney 

Marshal 

84 Land Dept. (Kansas & Nebraska) 

Surveyor General $2000.00 

Lecompton L. O 

Register 

Receiver 
Kickapoo L. O 

Register 

Receiver 

7RTL, 13646. SRTL, 13645. 

[306] 



APRIL 1, l86l 

Fort Scott L. O 

Register 

Receiver 
Ogden L. O 

Register 

Receiver 
Omaha L. O 

Register 

Receiver 
Brownville L. O 

Register 

Receiver 
Nebraska City L. O 

Register 

Receiver 

New-Mexico 9 
Governor 
Secretary 
C. J. 
Ass. J. 
Ass. J. 
Attorney 
Marshal- 
Land Dept 

84. Survey or-Genl. $3000.00 

85-6 Santa Fe L. O. 

Register "3000.00 

Receiver "3000.00 

94 Indian Dept. 

Superintendent Santa-Fe "2000.00 

Utah Agency "1550.00 

Apache Agency "1550.00 

Abiqun Agency " 1550.00 

Santa Fe Agency "1550.00 

Navajo Agency "1550,00 

do "1550.00 

Hon Conkling's card for N. Y. city. 10 

Collector Hiram Barney 
Surveyor Henry B. Stanton 

Naval Officer Abraham [Abram] Wakeman Thinks 
Mr. Denison preferable to either Mr. Dorsheimer, 
Draper, or Welch, partly because they all at present 
hold offices. 

District Attorney Wm. Curtis Noyes 
Marshal Jedediah W. Hartt 
Navy Agent D. D. T. Marshall 

Superintendent of the Assay Office Alfred Wells 
Assistant Treasurer George Opdyke 
9RTL, 13642- 

10 RTL, 9550. Tne heading and marginal note following "Wakeman" are in 
Lincoln's autograph; the list is Koscoe Conklingf s. 

307] 



APRIL 



l86l 



Utah 11 



Governor 
Secretary 
C. J. 
Ass. J 
Ass. J. 
Attorney 
Marshal 
84 Land Dept 

Surveyor General 
Salt Lake L. O 

Register 

Receiver 
94 Indian Dept. 

Superintendent (S.L.C) 

Agent 

Agent 

Agent 



Washington & Oregon 12 



Governor 
Secretary 
C J. 
Ass. J. 
Ass. J. 
Attorney 
Marshal 
84 Land Dept. 

Surveyor Gener 
Olympia L. O 
Register. 
Receiver. 
94 Indian Dept. 

Superintendent 
Puget Sound Agency 
Squakson Agency 
Siletz Agency 
Umpqua Agency 
Grand Ronde Agency 
E. Oregon Agency 
Cayuse Agency 
Col. River Agency 

Local do 
Flathead Agency 
Astoria Agency 
Collector at Fort-Townsend. 
Victor Smith 
Collector at Nesqually. 

Henry C. Wilson. 



William H. Wallace 
Leander J. S. Turney 
C. C. Hewitt 
James E. Wyche 

John J. McGilvra 



Arthur A. Denny, 
Joseph Cushman, 



$3000.00 

"3000.00 
"3000.00 

"2500.00 
"1550.00 
"1000.00 
"1000.00 



$3000.00 

2500.00 
2500.00 

2500.00 
1500.00 
1000.00 
1500.00 
1000.00 
1500.00 
1500.00 
1000.00 
1500.00 
1000.00 
1500.00 
1000.00 



HTL, 13643. 



, 13644. 



[308] 



Memorandum on Federal Appointments 1 

[c. April i, 1861] 

28. papers 



Andrew J. Atkinson. 
Presley G Athey 
A. J. Barker 
E W. Beckwith 
Hiram Beckwith 
J. A. Berry 
Geo. M. Biinkerhoff 
C. S. Broderick 
T. C. Buntin 
M. G. Birvies 
I. N. Burket 
C. B. Campbell 
T. A. Cheney 
Levi Clark. 
Samuel F. Fletcher 
H. W. Cobb 
Silas Colgrove 
Frank M. Cooley 
G. E. H. Day 
J. M. Craddock 

A. Denny 

J. Nevin Dickinson 
John S. DiU 
H. S. Dodd 
Chas. B. Dorrence 
Chas. B. Dienkhard 
David M. Dunn 
Joseph Eldridge 
Abraham Ellis 
H. N. Farnham 
Benjamin Fenn 
Joseph Froskett 
John A. Filbert 
Chas. W. Fribley 

B. C. Gillam 



Pa. 

Ills. 

Pa. 

Conn. 

Wis. 

O 

Ills 

la. 

la 

Mo. 

Pa 

N.Y 

Kan 

la 

lUs. 

la 

Pa 

Minn. 

Ills. 

Pa 

Ills 

Iowa 

Pa. 

Ark. 

la 

N.Y 

Kan 

N.Y. 

Iowa 
Md. 
Pa. 
His 



i. 



i 

7 

3 

i 

i 

19 
1 

2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 

4 
1 

3 
i 

2 
1 
1 

7 
i 
1 
1 
1 

2 
1 

i Paper 

5 

i 

4 



1 AD, DL.C-R.TLi. This document appears to be an incomplete list of persons 
recommended for office and the number of recommendations for each. 



[309] 



Memorandum on Foreign Appointments 1 

[c. April i, 1861] 
Vacancy 
Dip. 

Sec. to China 

Sec. to Russia. 

Min. & Sec. Argentine Con. 
Consuls 

Havanna Schuf eldt Seward. 

Odessa John D. Arnold, of Ills. 

Marseilles. J. C. Van Horn. (See 

papers filed for Glasgow) 
Lyons. James Lesley. 

Messina. Mark Howard. Conn. 

"Welles. 
Monrovia. 
Gabboon. 

Ning Po. "Willie P. Mangum. N.C. 

Foo. Choo. W. H. Carpenter. N.Y. 

Apia Daniel Ketcham N.Y. 

Rio Parsons Chase 

Montevideo. 
Guakil [Guayaquil?] 

Florence. T. Bigelow Lawrence no pay. 

* AD, DLC-RTL. 

Memorandum: Appointment of Oliver G. AbelP 

[c, April i, 1861] 

Oliver G. Abell is an applicant for a Land-Office on the Pacific. 
Mr. Abell is the child of very intimate friends of mine, and I 
would like, if possible, to oblige him. 

1 AD, DNA NR RG 48, Applications, Registers and Receivers, General Land 
Office, California, 1852-1868, Box 1276. Oliver G. Abell is listed as a clerk in the 
General Land Office in Washington in 1863. He was the son of Lincoln's old 
friend at New Salem, Illinois, Bennett Abell. His letter of April, 1861, is in the 
Lincoln Papers. 

Memorandiim: Appointments of John C. Baum 
and Adolphns Games 1 

[c. April i, 1861] 

Hon. John A. Gurley, recommends for P.M. at Gin. John C. 
Banm. For Collector Adolplms Carnes. 
i AD, DLC-RTL. 

[310] 



Memorandum: Appointment of Edward F. Beale 1 

[c. April i, 1861] 

Hon. John Hickman, and Hon. John W. Forney, think that Ed- 
ward F. Beale, now resident of California, ought, by all means, to 
be Surveyor General of CaL 

i AD, DNA NR RG 48, Appointments, Surveyors General, Box 2, 1861. 

Memorandum : Appointment of Postmaster 
at Bmghamton, New York 1 

[c. April i, 1861] 

I appointed P.M. at Binghampton, on special request of Gov. 
Seward. 

1 AD, DLC-Nicolay Papers. Lincoln appointed William Stuart postmaster at 
Binghamton, New York. 

Memorandum: Appointment of James S. Boal 1 

[c. April i, 1861] 

Dr. Robert Boal of Lacon, Ills, wishes his son, James St. C. Boal, 
to be Assistant Sec. of Leg. to Paris & I want him to be obliged. 

1 AD 7 DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 277. There is no record of Boal's 
appointment. 

Memorandum: Appointment of George D wight 1 

[c. April i, 1861] 

Mr. Samuel Bowles, introduced by Hon. Geo. Ashmun, joins the 
Mass. del. in recommending George Dwight to be Sup. of Armory 
at Springfield, Mass, 
i AD, DLC-RTL. 

Memorandum : 

Appointment of John W. Griffiths 1 

[c. April i, 1861] 

"Ichabod" wants John W. Griffiths to be a constructor in the 
Philadelphia Navy Yard. He has an interest in it. 

1 AD, DLC-RTL. "Ichabod" was probably Lincoln's boyhood friend Israel S. 
Smith See Lincoln to Welles about this appointment, April 19, infra Griffiths 
was the naval architect who first suggested the famous "clipper" ships and was 
editor of the Nautical Magazine and Naval Journal. He had built the gunboat 
Pawnee in 1858. 

[311] 



Memorandum : 
Appointment of John P. Hatterscheidt 1 

[c. April i, 1861] 

When we come to act again upon consulships, I wish John P. Hat- 
terscheidt to be appointed to Antwerp, unless some reason to the 
contrary, not now known to me, shall appear. A. LmcoLrc 

1 AD, DLC-RTL. The memorandum is with an undated letter recommending 
Hatterscheidt, "a citizen of Kansas," signed by James H. Lane and Samuel G. 
Pomeroy. Hatterscheidt was appointed to the consulship at Moscow durmg the 
recess of the Senate and confirmed by the Senate, July 26. 



Memorandum : 
Appointment of James H. Holmes 1 

[c. April i, 1861] 

James H. Holmes, for Surveyor General, of New-Mexico. Recom- 
mended by known men. 

1 AD, DNA NR RG 48, Applications, Surveyors General, New Mexico, Box 
1261. 



Memorandum : 
Appointment of John L. Mansfield 1 

[c. April i, 1861] 

Mr. John L. Mansfield, Elector, of Madison, la. is an applicant 
for consul at Havre; but being in easy circumstances, would ac- 
cept a different one with smaller emolument. 

1 AD, DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 341. James O. Putnam was ap- 
pointed consul at Havre, and there is no record of an appointment for John L. 
Mansfield of Madison, Indiana (not Iowa) . 

Memorandum: Appointment of Amasa Mason 1 

[c. April i, 1861] 

Amasa Mason, of Buffalo, N.Y. is urgently pressed by Gov. Cor- 
win, of Ohio, for consul at Melbourne, Gov. Corwin declaring that 
the Mercantile community of N.Y. city very much desire his ap- 
pointment. 

1 AD, DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 342. Corwin to Lincoln, April i, 
1861, recommended Mason (DLC-RTL.), but William Blanchard of Maryland 
was consul at Melbourne as of September 30, 1861. 

[312] 



Memorandum : 
Appointment of John H. Peters 1 

[c. April i, 1861] 

It is proposed that Judge John H. Peters, of S.C. be Consul to 
Tunis, with an eye to the Gotten culture. 

1 AD, DLC-RTL. Lincoln appointed Peters during the recess of the Senate 
and sent his nomination on July 9, but the Executive Journal does not record 
confirmation of the appointment after referral to the committee on commerce. 

Memoranda : 
Appointment of William B. Richmond 1 

[c. April i, 1861] 

Mr. Richmond resides in Tenn. and is recommended by Messrs 
Bell, Johnson, Maynard & Nelson. Also by Senator Simmons & 
other Rhode Islanders. 

App* Consul at Paris or Havre. Recommended by Senator Sim- 
mons & also Messrs Bell & Johnson. 

* AD, DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 370. William B. Richmond was 
not appointed to either post, but on December 23, Lincoln nominated "hrm for 
the consulship at Tunis upon John H. Peters' failure {supra) to be confirmed. 
On March 24, 1862, Lincoln withdrew William B. Richmond's nomination in 
favor of Amos Perry of Rhode Island, who was confirmed April 15 (Executive 
Journal). The persons listed as recommending Richmond were Senator James 
F. Simmons of Rhode Island, Andrew Johnson, John Bell, Representative 
Horace Maynard, and Representative Thomas A. R. Nelson all of Tennessee. 
Lincoln was in error in listing Senator Simmons among William B. Richmond's 
supporters, having confused the latter with William W. Richmond, also an ap- 
plicant for the Paris consulship. Both William B. of Tennessee and William W. 
of New Orleans had resided abroad for some years. Both were well recom- 
mended, loyal, and apparently of unusual competence. But neither was ap- 
pointed because of the confusion of identity. See Lincoln to Seward, June 8 and 
August 7, and Lincoln's memorandum concerning "William W. Richmond, 
August 25, infra. 

To Andrew H. Foote 1 

Washington, April i, 1861. 

Fit out Poiuhatan to go to sea at the earliest possible moment 
under sealed orders. Orders by a confidential messenger go for- 
ward to-morrow. ABRAHAM LINCOUST. 
Commandant Navy Yard, 
Brooklyn, N.Y. 

1 Naval Records, Series I, IV, 109. The several communications addressed to 
Foote, Mercer, and Porter on April i, as printed in various sources are all in 

[313] 



APRIL 1, 86l 

general agreement, but our failure to locate the original documents issued in 
connection with the Poivhatan episode leaves much to be desired in clarifying 
the circumstances which occasioned the several communications. The fact that 
the text of these communications as printed in Hertz, II, 825-28, is either badly 
garbled or derived from an unknown if authentic source, further complicates 
the matter. It seems scarcely probable that Lincoln would have written two 
different letters in each case, at once so verbally different, yet substantially the 
same. Hence the editors have relied on the Official Records for the texts here re- 
produced. Lincoln's secret orders to Foote, Mercer, and Porter were issued on 
Seward's advice, unknown to the Navy Department. Hence there developed a 
sad confusion which deprived the Sumter expedition of the Powhatan, Gustavus 
V. Fox, in command of the expedition, did not learn of the Powhatan's with- 
drawal until April 13 while awaiting its arrival at Charleston harbor. See Lin- 
coln's letter exonerating Fox, May i, infra. 



To Andrew H. Foote 1 

Sir: Executive Mansion, April i, 1861. 

You will fit out the Poivhatan without delay. Lieutenant Porter 
will relieve Captain Mercer in command of her. She is bound on 
secret service, and you wall under no circumstances communicate 
to the Navy Department the fact that she is fitting out. 

Commandant Navy Yard, ABRAHAM: LUNTCOLIN-. 

New York. 

1 Naval Records, Series I, IV, 109. DaTid D. Porter, Naval History of the 
Civil War (New York, 1886), p. 102, gives the same text. This is the order 
sent by messenger, referred to above. 



To Samuel Mercer 1 

Washington City, April i, 1861. 

Sir: Circumstances render it necessary to place in command of 
your ship, and for a special purpose, an officer who is duly in- 
formed and instructed in relation to the wishes of the Government, 
and you will therefore consider yourself detached; but in taking 
this step the Government does not intend in the least to reflect 
upon your efficiency or patriotism; on the contrary, have the full- 
est confidence in your ability to perform any duty required of you. 

Hoping soon to be able to give you a better command than the 
one you now enjoy, and trusting that you will have full confidence 
in the disposition of the Government toward you, I remain, 

Captain Samuel Mercer, U.S. Navy. ABRAHAM LnsrcoLisr. 

1 Naval Records, Series I, IV, 109. Nicolay and Hay (VI, 238) date this letter 
April 2, on what grounds the editors cannot determine. 

[314] 



To Officers of the Army and Navy 1 

Executive Mansion, Washington, April i, 1861. 
All officers of the Army and Navy, to whom this order may be 
exhibited, "will aid by every means in their power the expedition 
under the command of Col. Harvey Brown, supplying him, with 
men and material and cooperating with him as he may desire. 

ABRAKAIM 



1 OR, I, I, 367. The source designates this as an enclosure to General Scott's 
order to Colonel Harvey Brown of April i, -which was approved by Lincoln 
April 2, 1861. Colonel Brown was placed in command of the expedition to re- 
inforce Fort Pickens. 

To David D. Porter 1 

Executive Mansion, April i, 1861. 

Lieutenant D. D. Porter will take command of the steamer Poiu- 
hatan, or any other United States steamer ready for sea which he 
may deem most fit for the service to which he has been assigned by 
confidential instructions of this date. 

All officers are commanded to afford him all such facilities as 
he may deem necessary for getting to sea as soon as possible. He 
will select the officers who are to accompany him. 

Recommended: Wnvr. EL SEWAB.D. ABRAHAM: LINCOLN. 

1 Naval Records, Series I, IV, 108. 

To David D. Porter 1 

Executive Mansion, April i, 1861. 

Sir: You will proceed to New York, and with the least possible 
delay assume command of any naval steamer available. Proceed 
to Pensacola Harbor, and at any cost or risk prevent any expedi- 
tion from the mainland reaching Fort Pickens or Santa Rosa 
[Island]. 

You will exhibit this order to any naval officer at Pensacola if 
you deem it necessary after you have established yourself within 
the harbor, and will request cooperation by the entrance of at 
least one other vessel. 

This order, its object, and your destination will be communi- 
cated to no person whatever until you reach the harbor of Pensa- 
cola. ABRAHAM: Lmcor^sr. 

Lieutenant D. D. Porter, U.S. Navy. 

Recommended: WM. H. SEWAHD. 

1 Naval Records,, Series I, IV, 108-109. 

[315] 



To Winfield Scott 1 

Lieut General Scott: Executive Mansion April ist 1861. 

Would it impose too much labor on General Scott to make short, 
comprehensive daily reports to me of what occurs in his Depart- 
ment, including movements by himself, and under his orders, and 
the receipt of intelligence? If not I will thank him to do so. Your 
Obedient Servant A. 



1 Copy, DLC-RTL. General Scott reported April i, and with fair regularity 
thereafter. These daily reports, together with Lincoln's memoranda on the days 
Scott failed to report ("No report from Gen. Scott this 19. April 1861.") are in 
the Lincoln Papers. 

To William HL Seward 1 

Hon: W. H. Seward: Executive Mansion April i, 1861 

My dear Sir: Since parting with you I have been considering 
your paper dated this day, and entitled "Some thoughts for the 
President's consideration." The first proposition in it is, "ist. We 
are at the end of a month's administration, and yet without a pol- 
icy, either domestic or foreign." 

At the beginning of that month, in the inaugeral, I said "The 
power confided to me will be used to hold, occupy and possess the 
property and places belonging to the government, and to collect 
the duties, and imposts." This had your distinct approval at the 
time; and, taken in connection with the order I immediately gave 
General Scott, directing him to employ every means in his power 
to strengthen and hold the forts, comprises the exact domestic pol- 
icy you now urge, with the single exception, that it does not pro- 
pose to abandon Fort Sumpter. 

Again, I do not perceive how the re-inforcement of Fort Sump- 
ter would be done on a slavery, or party issue, while that of Fort 
Pickens would be on a more national, and patriotic one. 

The news received yesterday in regard to St. Domingo, cer- 
tainly brings a new item within the range of our foreign policy; 2 
but up to that time we have been preparing circulars, and instruc- 
tions to ministers, and the like, all in perfect harmony, without 
even a suggestion that we had no foreign policy. 

Upon your closing propositions, that "whatever policy we adopt, 
there must be an energetic prossecution of it" 

"For this purpose it must be somebody's business to pursue and 
direct it incessantly" 

"Either the President must do it himself, and be all the while 
active in it, or" 

[316] 



APRIL 1, l86l 

"Devolve it on some member of his cabinet" 

"Once adopted, debates on it must end, and all agree and abide" 
I remark that if this must be done, 7 must do it, "When a general 
line of policy is adopted, I apprehend there is no danger of its be- 
ing changed without good reason, or continuing to be a subject of 
unnecessary debate; still, upon points arising in its progress, I 
wish, and suppose I am entitled to have the advice of all the cab- 
inet. Your Obt. Servt. A. 



*ALS, DLC-RTL. The envelope with the letter is addressed by Lincoln 
"Hon. W. H. Seward/Present." There is no reply in the Lincoln Papers. Lin- 
coln may have handed the letter to Seward personally or sent it by messenger. 
If so, he must have requested its return. The fact that no biography of Seward 
mentions such a letter among the Seward Papers indicates that the document in 
the Lincoln Papers is probably the original -which was never sent The 
editors have doubts that the letter was presented to Seward at all. Having writ- 
ten it, Lincoln may have thought better of rebuking his secretary in writing 
and handled the matter orally. The memorandum to which Lincoln replied is in 
the handwriting of Frederick W. Seward, as follows: 

"Some thoughts for the President's consideration 

April i. 1861. 

"ist. "We are at the end of a month's administration and yet without a policy 
either domestic or foreign. 

"ad This, however, is not culpable, and it has been unavoidable. The presence 
of the Senate, with the need to meet applications for patronage have prevented 
attention to other and more grave matters. 

"sd. But further delay to adopt and prosecute our policies for both domestic 
and foreign affairs would not only bring scandal on the Administration, but dan- 
ger upon the country. 

"4th. To do this we must dismiss the applicants for office. But how? I suggest 
that we make the local appointments forthwith, leaving foreign or general ones 
for ulterior and occasional action. 

"5th. The policy at home. I am aware that my views are singular, and per- 
haps not sufficiently explained. My system is built upon this idea as a ruling 
one, namely that we must 

"Change the question before the Public from one upon Slavery^ or about 
Slavery 

"for a question upon Union or Disunion. 

"In other words, from what would be regarded as a Party question to one of 
Patriotism or Union 

"The occupation or evacuation of Fort Sumter, although not in fact a slavery, 
or a party question is so regarded. "Witness, the temper manifested by the Re- 
publicans in the Free States, and even by TJnion men in the South. 

"I would therefore terminate it as a safe means for changing the issue. I 
deem it fortunate that the last Administration created the necessity. 

"For the rest. I would simultaneously defend and reinforce all the Forts in 
the Gulf, and have the Navy recalled from foreign stations to be prepared for 
a blockade. Put the Island of Key West under Martial Law 

"This will raise distinctly the question of Union or Disunion. I would main- 
tain every fort and possession in the South. 

For Foreign Nations. 

"I would demand explanations from Spain and France, categorically, at once. 
"I would seek explanations from Great Britain and Russia, and send agents 

[317] 



APRIL 1, l86l 

into Canada., Mexico and Central America, to rouse a vigorous continen tal 
spirit of independence on this continent against European intervention. 

"And if satisfactory explanations are not received from Spain and France, 

""Would convene Congress and declare war against them 

"But whatever policy we adopt, there must be an energetic prosecution of it. 

"For this purpose it must "be somebody's business to pursue and direct it in- 
cessantly. 

"Either the President must do it himself, and be all the while active in it; or 

"Devolve it on some member of his Cabinet. Once adopted, debates on it must 
end, and all agree and abide. 

"It is not in my especial province 

"But I neither seek to evade nor assume responsibility" (DLC-RTL) . 

2 The Spanish colonists in San Domingo had hoisted the Spanish flag on 
March 16, and the Spanish ship Blanca had been sent from Havana with troops 
to assist in annexation of the country. 

To Gideon Welles 1 

(Confidential.) 

To the Secretary of the Navy. Executive Mansion, 

Dear Sir: April i, 1861. 

You will issue instructions to Captain Pendergrast, 2 command- 
ing the home squadron, to remain in observation at Vera Cruz 
important complications in our foreign relations rendering the 
presence of an officer of rank there of great importance. 

Captain Stringham 3 -will be directed to proceed to Pensacola 
with all possible despatch, and assume command of that portion of 
the home squadron stationed off Pensacola. He will have confiden- 
tial instructions to cooperate in every "way with the commander 
of the land forces of the "United States in that neighborhood. 

The instructions to the army officers, which are strictly confi- 
dential, will be communicated to Captain Stringham after he ar- 
rives at Pensacola. 

Captain Samuel Barron -will relieve Captain Stringham in 
charge of the Bureau of detail. ABRAHAM: LUNTCOUST. 

PS. As it is very necessary at this time to have a perfect knowl- 
edge of the personnel of the navy, and to be able to detail such 
officers for special purposes as the exigencies of the service may 
require. I request that you will instruct Captain Barron to proceed 
and organize the Bureau of detail in the manner best adapted to 
meet the wants of the navy, taking cognizance of the discipline of 
the navy generally, detailing all officers for duty, taking charge 
of the recruiting of seamen, supervising charges made against of- 
ficers, and all matters relating to duties which must be best under- 
stood by a sea officer. You will please afford Captain Barron any 
facility for accomplishing this duty, transferring to his depart- 

[318] 



APRIL 2, l86l 

ment the clerical force heretofore used for the purposes specified. 
It is to be understood that this officer will act by authority of Sec- 
retary of the Navy, who will exercise such supervision as he may 
deem necessary. ABRAHAM: LIISTCOUNT. 

* Gideon Welles, "Fort Sumter," The Galaxy , November, 1870, X, 624. 
Welles describes the letter as being in the handwriting of Montgomery C. 
Meigs and the postscript in the handwriting of David D. Porter and comments 
that "the President expressed as much surprise as I felt that he had signed and 
sent me such a document." He adds: "Pendergrast did not go to Vera Cniz nor 
Stringham to Pensacola." (p. 626). 2 Garrett J. Pendergrast. 

3 Silas H. Stringham. 

To Mrs. Mary Hancock Colyer 1 

Executive Mansion April 2, 1861 

My Dear Madam I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt 
of your favour of the 2, and of March. 

Permit me to express nay cordial thanks for the interesting relic 
you were so kind as to send me, as well as for the flattering senti- 
ment with which it was accompanied. I am with great respect 
Your Obdt Servt. A. LiiNTCOLiNr 

Mary Hancock Colyer 105 Bleeker St New York 

1 LS, owned by Richard F. L/ufkin, Boston, Massachusetts. Mrs, Colyer wrote 
March 22, 1861, ". . . As niece of John Hancock, I take pleastire in present- 
ing ... a share ticket issued by the province of Massachusetts Bay, 1765, for 
the rebuilding of Faneuil Hall, signed by John Hancock, and endorsed on the 
back by Abraham lincoln . . . one of your ancestors. . . ." (DL.C-RTL). 

Memorandurri : 
Appointment of Ward H. Lamon 1 

April 2, 1861 

This April 2, 1861, these papers were presented in person to me, 
by John Van Riswick, Samuel Norment, Benedict Milburn, Wil- 
liam Wise, George Mattingly, Thomas Lewis, W. Krzyzanowski 
J. J. Coombs, Amos Duvall, George Feaman & William P. Wood, & 
James A. Wise. 

1 AE, DLC-B.TL.. The endorsement is -written on a petition of Washington, 
D.C., citizens for appointment of Lamon as marshal of the District. See Lincoln 
to Bates, April 6, infra. 

Memorandum: Appointment of Simeon Smith 1 

April 2, 1861 

This and. day of April 1861 Mr. Senator Preston King appears in 
person, and presses that Simeon Smith, of Minnesota be appointed 

[319] 



APRIL 2 9 l86l 

Commissioner of Pensions. Mr. King makes a personal appeal in 
the case. 

1 DNA NB. RG 48, Applications, Secretary of the Interior, Box 1293. Simeon 
Smith, a native of New York, was commissioned major in the Second Minnesota 
Infantry, July 23, 1861, and resigned to accept a commission as paymaster, 
August 29, 1861. 



To William H. Seward 1 

Executive Mansion 2d April 1861. 

1 direct that ten thousand dollars be paid to Captain M. C. 
Meigs, by the Secretary of State 2 from the secret service fund. 

ABRAHAM LusrcoLisr 

1 DS, RPB. Captain Montgomery C. Meigs accompanied Colonel Harvey 
Brown as chief engineer on the expedition to reinforce Fort Pickens. 

2 "By the Secretary of State" inserted by Lincoln. 



To Gideon Welles 1 

April 2, 1861 

Mr. G. H. Heap will if summoned by Capt. D. D. Porter U.S. 
Navy, join him instantly in New York, temporarily vacating his 
desk at the Navy department. 

1 Stan. V. Henkels Catalog 1342, January 4, 1924, No. 8. Gwinn H. Heap, a 
clerk in the Navy Department, sailed on the Powhatan as acting paymaster. 



To Erasmus D. Keyes 1 

Executive Mansion, 

Lieutenant- Colonel E. D. Keyes, Washington, 

United States Army, Military Secretary: April 3, 1861. 

You will proceed forthwith to the city of New York to carry out 
the instructions which you have received here* All requisitions 
made upon officers of the staff by your authority, and all orders 
given by you to any officer of the Army in my name, will be in- 
stantly obeyed. ABRAHAM 



1 Erasmus D. Keyes, Fifty Years Observation of Men and Events (New York, 
1884), p. 387. Lieutenant Colonel Keyes, military secretary to General Scott, 
was authorized to prepare plans for reinforcement of Fort Pickens (Order of 
General Scott to Colonel Harvey Brown, April i, OR, I, I, 366). 

[320] 



Memorandum : 
Appointment of John C. Henshaw 1 

[c. April 3, i86i] 2 

Mr. Kellogg does me great injustice to write in this strain. He 
has had more favors than any other Illinois member, not except- 
ing, I think, Judge Trumbull. Is it really in his heart to add to my 
perplexities now? A. 



1 AES, ORB. The endorsement is written on the back of William Kellogg to 
Lincoln: "Mansion of Prst Lincoln Wdnsdy April 3 1861. ... I desire to with- 
draw, the pamphlet and papers I left with you this morning relating to the ap- 
pointment of Major Henshaw ... I regret to again trouble you, and hope 
never again to feel the humiliation I did in our interview of this morning or 
again to solicit patronage, that I may not demand as the right of a representa- 
tive of the people and a citizen of the Republic. , . ." 

2 This endorsement is dated April 5, 1861 in Hertz, II, 828. 



To Gideon Welles 1 

( Confidential ) 

Executive Mansion sd April 1861. 

The secretary of the Navy will please cause three complete sets 
of signal books telegraphic & common to be delivered to the bearer. 

ABRAHAM 



1 LS, DNA WR NB RG 45, Executive Letters, 57. No record has been found 
identifying the bearer. The signal books may have been intended for Major An- 
derson at Fort Sumter. If so, their failure to arrive was a contributing factor to 
the failure of the expedition to relieve the fort, for the Army could not under- 
stand Navy signals. 

To Robert Anderson 1 

[War Department] Washington, April 4. 1861 

Sir: Your letter of the ist. inst. occasions some anxiety to the 
President. 2 

On the information of Capt. Fox, 3 he had supposed you could 
hold out till the igth. inst. without any great inconvenience; and 
had prepared an expedition to relieve you before that period. 

Hoping still that you will be able to sustain yourself till the 
nth. or 12th. inst. the expedition will go forward; and, finding 
your flag flying, will attempt to provision you, and, in case the 
effort is resisted, will endeavor also to reinforce you* 

You will therefore hold out if possible till the arrival of the ex- 
pedition. 

[321] 



APRIL 5, l86l 

It is not, however, the intention of the President to subject your 
command to any danger or hardship beyond what, in your judg- 
ment, would be usual in military life; and he has entire confidence 
that you will act as becomes a patriot and a soldier, under all cir- 
cumstances. 

Whenever, if at all, in your judgment, to save yourself and 
command, a capitulation becomes a necessity, you are authorized 
to make it. [Respectfully Siivtorsr CAMERON,] 

[To Major Robert Anderson 
U.S. Army] 

This was sent by Capt. Talbot, on April 6, 1861, to be delivered 
to Maj. Anderson, if permitted. On reaching Charleston, he was 
refused permission to deliver it to Major Anderson. 

* ADf and AE, DLC-RTL. In addition to Lincoln's draft, the letter signed by 
Cameron and sent by Captain Theodore Talbot, assistant adjutant general, is in 
the Lincoln Papers. Bracketed portions are from Cameron's letter and are not 
in Lincoln's draft. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the envelope containing 
Cameron's letter. 

2 Anderson to Lorenzo Thomas indicated that because of scarcity of rations 
he had discharged laborers working on the fort, but that the secretary of war for 
South Carolina had not given authority for their removal. ". . . . If the Gov- 
ernor permits me to send off the laborers we will have rations enough to last us 
about a week." (OR, I, I, 230). 

3 Gustavus V. Fox, assistant secretary of the Navy, in command of the 
Sumter expedition. 



Memorandiun : 
Appointment of Ethelbert E Oliphant 1 

[c. April 5, 1861] 

Ethelbert E Oliphant, of Uniontown, Pa. is an old acquaintance 
of mine; and I wish, if I can make it reasonably convenient to 
give him a place. He prefers a Judgeship in Nebraska; but I am 
to try to find something for him, either in the Departments here, 
or elsewhere. 

Swamp-land matter. 

IAD, DLC-RTL. Oliphant to Lincoln, July 28, 1859, recalled that ". . . our 
first acquaintance and interview, took place in the Spring of 1832 at *Salem*. . . . 
Our next meeting was in the 'bloody Fourth 9 . . . where we were 'fratres miles* 
in the Black Hawk War. . . ." Oliphant's letter of April 5, 1861, asked for a 
judgeship in the swamp land division of the General Land Office: "Allow me 
however just modestly to remark, that I think I am deserving of something 
better. . . .'* (DLC-RTL) . Lincoln appointed Oliphant associate justice of Wash- 
ington Territory. 

[322] 



To Ira R Rankin 1 

April 5, 1861 

Lockwood M. Todd, above named, is a cousin of Mrs. L. and she 
and I will be much obliged if the collector can give him the place 
he seeks. 

1 Parke-Bernet Catalog 130, October 18-19, 1939, No. 213. Ira R Rankin, 
collector of customs at San Francisco, wrote Lincoln, May 31, 1861, "I feel 
compelled to -write to you in regard to the appointment of L. M. Todd as Cus- 
tom House Drayman ... a formal protest has been sent to me against it, 
signed by the county Committee, and a large number of the Republicans of 
Solano County, where he resides, representing that he has been a most bitter 
and violent opponent of the Republican party. . . ." (DLC-RT3L). No record of 
Todd's appointment has been found prior to March 25, 1864, "when he was 
made commissary of subsistence "with rank of captain. He was the son of Dr. 
John Todd of Springfield, Illinois. 

To Edward Bates 1 

Hon. Attorney General Executive Mansion 

Dear Sir: April 6. 1861 

Please make out and send me the proper document, for appoint- 
ing Ward EL Lamon, to be Marshal for the District of Columbia. 
Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, ORB. See memorandum concerning L/amon's appointment, April 2, 
supra. 

To Robert S. Chew 1 

["War Department.] Washington, April 6. 1861 
Sir You will proceed directly to Charleston, South Carolina; and 
if, on your arrival there, the flag of the United States shall be fly- 
ing over Fort-Sumpter, and the Fort shall not have been attacked, 
you will procure an interview with Gov. Pickens, and read to him 
as follows: 

"I am directed by the President of the United States to notify 
you to expect an attempt "will be made to supply Fort-Sumpter 
with provisions only; and that, if such attempt be not resisted, 
no effort to throw in men, arms, or amunition, will be made, 
without further notice, or in case of an attack upon the Fort" 

After you shall have read this to Governor Pickens, deliver to 
him the copy of it herein inclosed, and retain this letter yourself. 

But if, on your arrival at Charleston, you shall ascertain that 
Fort Sumpter shall have been already evacuated, or surrendered, 
by the United States force; or, shall have been attacked by an 

[323] 



APRIL 6 5 l86l 

opposing force, you will seek no interview with Gov. Pickens, but 
return here forthwith. [Respectfully Siivtor^ CAMERON 

Secy of War] 
[Endorsement] 

Notice carried by R. S. Chew to Gov. Pickens., and his report 
as to how he gave the notice. 

1 ADf, AD, AE; DLC-RTL. In addition to Lincoln's autograph draft of the 
letter, the paragraph quoted in the letter, and the endorsement on the envelope, 
Cameron's LS copied from Lincoln's draft and Chew's report to the President 
on April 8, are in the Lincoln Papers. Bracketed portions are not in Lincoln's 
draft, but are reproduced from Cameron's LS. Robert S. Chew was a clerk in 
the State Department. His report is as follows: 

"To the President Charleston S.C. April 8th 1861 

"Under the foregoing orders I left Washington at 6 P.M. Saturday April 6th, 
1861, in company with Capt. Theodore Talbot, U.S. Army, and arrived at 
Charleston, S.C. on Monday at the same hour. Finding that Fort Sumter had 
neither been surrendered, evacuated nor attacked, I immediately thro* Capt. 
Talbot, requested an interview with Governor Pickens, which was at once ac- 
corded to me, and I then read to him the portion of said orders in italics [quo- 
tation marks], and delivered to hrm the copy of the same which was furnished 
to me for that purpose, in the presence of Capt Talbot. Govr. Pickens received 
the Copy and said he would submit it to General Beauregard, He having, since 
the ratification of the Constitution of the Confederate States by South Carolina, 
been placed in charge of the Military operations in this vicinity. Genl. Beau- 
regard was accordingly sent for, and the Governor read the paper to him. 

"In reply to a remark made by Governor Pickens in reference to an answer 
I informed him that I was not authorised to receive any communication from 
him in reply. Respectfully submitted R. S. CHEW" 

To Gideon Welles 1 

April 6, 1861 

I have a letter [here from Fort] Sumter which. Commodore 
[Stri]ngham ought to see before he leaves. Yours truly 

A. LnSTCOLlN". 

1 Stan. V. Henkels Catalog 1342, January 4, 1924, No. 48E. Brackets are in 
the catalog which describes the item as damaged by fire, Lincoln probably 
wanted to show Silas H. Stringham the report of Captain Theodore Talbot who 
returned from Fort Sumter on April 6. 

To Andrew G. Curtin 1 

Gov. A. G. Curtin Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: April 8. 1861 

I think the necessity of being ready increases. Look to it. Yours 
truly A. LINCOUST 

i ALS-P, ISLA. 

[324] 



To James M. Edmunds 1 

Executive Mansion^ 
Commissioner of the General Land Office. April 8. 1861 

Sir In pursuance of the i8th. and igth. sections of the Act 
mentioned in the foregoing letter, 2 I direct that the Yancton Land 
District be now formed with the boundaries described in said sec- 
tion 18, and that the Land Office for said District be located at the 
town of Vermilion in said District. I also name Jesse Wherry, of 
Virginia to be Receiver of Public Monies, and Henry A. Kennerly 
of Missouri, to be Register of said Land Office 

ABRAHAM LrrccoiJNr 

1 ALS, South Dakota Historical Society. 

2 A letter from Commissioner James M. Edmunds. 

Memorandum: Appointment of Surveyor and 
CoUector of the Port of New York 1 

[c. April 8, 1861] 

Greely, Opdycke, Field & Wadsworth, in favor of having the 
two big puddings on the same side of the board. 

1 AE, DLC-RTL. The endorsement is written on the envelope enclosing let- 
ters from Horace Greeley, George Opdyke, David D. Field, and James S. Wads- 
worth, April 8, 1861. Greeley asked **. . . the selection of a Surveyor of the 
Port who shall be in full accord and sympathy with the Collector already ap- 
pointed. . . . The appointments made for this state . . . have generally "been 
made from the other wing of the party. . . ." (DLG-B.TL.) . The surveyorship 
went to Rufus F. Andrews, whom Greeley had recommended on February 6 for 
district attorney for New York (ibid.}. 

Memorandum : 

Appointment of Commissioner of Pensions 1 

April 9, 1861 

Joseph H. Barrett, for Comr. of Pensions. Mention to Cabinet 
today April 9, 1861. 

1 AE, DLC-RTL. The endorsement is written on a letter of William Hel- 
mick's to Lincoln, April 6, 1861, withdrawing his application in favor of Joseph 
H. Barrett of Cincinnati. 

Memorandum: Appointment of Christian Metz 1 

[c. April 9, 1861] 

When I received these notes the commission in the case men- 
tioned, had been signed and sent away. 

[325] 



APRIL 9, l86l 

1 AES, NBuHi. The endorsement is written on a letter of Salmon P. Chase's 
to Preston King, April 8, 1861, forwarded to Lincoln in recommendation of 
Christian Metz for collector at Buffalo, New York. Metz received the appoint- 
ment. 

To James Short 1 

James Short Washington, 

Petersburg, Ills. April 9. 1861 

Go to Charleston, Ills, and see Geo. M. Hanson. A. LUNTCOOST 

1 ALS copy, DLC-RTL. George M. Hanson of Charleston, Illinois, was ap- 
pointed to the Northern superintendency of Indian agencies in California. Lin- 
coln's old friend James Short was appointed supervisor of the Round Valley, 
California, reservation. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion April 10. 1861 

Dear Sir: Gov. Curtin telegraphs us to send him a drill-officer. 

Better send one at once. 

I have talked with Col. Smith 2 about it. Your Obt. Servt. 

A. LiisrcorjNr 

1 ALS, RPB. 

2 Lieutenant Colonel Charles F. Smith, in command of the Department of 
Washington. 

To Salmon P. Chase 1 

Hon. Sec. of Treasury Executive Mansion 

Dear Sir April 10. 1861 

Mr. Wood thinks that possibly he can save you something in 
the matter of engraving Treasury Notes. Please give him an inter- 
view, & see what there is of it. Yours truly A. LirsrcouNT 

1 ALS-P, ISLA. There is no reply from Chase or other documents related to 
the subject of this letter in the Lincoln Papers. William S. Wood of New York 
was engaged in soliciting business for the American Bank Note Company of 
New York. A letter of Tracy R. Eds on, President, American Bank Note Com- 
pany, to William S. Wood, June 6, 1861, contains a memorandum, on the print- 
ing of defense bonds for the State of Missouri, which Edson asked "Wood to 
bring "to the notice of the President." (DLC-RTL) . Wood was nominated to the 
Senate as commissioner of public buildings on July 5, but failed to be con- 
firmed, one of the objections to his appointment being his activities in connec- 
tion with the printing of government securities. 

To Montgomery Blair 1 

Hon. P.M.G. Executive Mansion. 

Sir April 11. 1861. 

Has a Post-Master been appointed, as yet, at Covington, Ky. 
Col. Carpenter, wishes John S. Scott to be appointed. He says 

[326] 



APRIL 11, l86l 

Scott, is a Douglas Union-man. I know nothing as to the propriety 
of this; but write to keep a promise. 



1 ALS, DLC-Nicolay Papers. Blair's reply is written on the bottom of the let- 
ter as follows: "The incumbent of this office is a Mr. [W.D.] Holt in whose 
behalf the Hon Mr. [Joseph] Holt is interested & applied indirectly to me for 
his retention. MB" 



To Simon Cameron 1 

[c. April 11, 1861] 
What says the Sec. of War to this? LINCOLN 

1 AES, DL.C-R.TL. The endorsement is -written on a letter from John Pope to 
Ward H. Lamon, April 11, 1861. Captain John Pope, son of Nathaniel Pope, serv- 
ing as topographical engineer building lighthouses on the Great Lakes, suggested 
that ". . . it would be well for Mr Lincoln to have near Mm some Army friend 
interested in him personally. ... I would be gratified therefore if the President 
would order me to Washington ... as his aid & military Secretary. . . ." 
Cameron's endorsement reads: "The Secretary of War thinks this a very modest 
request." (DL.C-B.TL). See also, Lincoln to Cameron, April 26, infra. 

To Salmon E Chase 1 

Hon. S. P. Chase: Executive Mansion April 11. 1861. 

Dear Sir: "W. W. Danenhower, is the only marked representa- 
tive of the American organization in Ills, "who co-operated with us 
in 1858 & 1860, and who is now asking any thing here. He was 
very serviceable to us then, and is very needy now. Can any thing 
be found for him permanent, or temporary? Please try. Yours 
very truly A. LINCOLN 

1 AL.S, CSmH. "William W. Danenhower, a** attorney of Chicago, -was ap- 
pointed chief clerk in the fourth auditor's office. 

Memorandum: Appointment of Mahlon Yardley 1 

April 11, 1861 

This nth. day of April 1861, Mr. Caleb N. Taylor, personally 
appears and urges, in behalf of the 7th. Congressional District, 
that Mahlon Yardley, be appointed Deputy Surveyor at Philadel- 
phia. In this Hon. D. Wilmot & Hon. Jno. Covode, back Mr. 
Taylor. 

1 AD-P, ISLA. Caleb N. Taylor of Bristol, Pennsylvania, had "been a delegate 
to the Chicago convention in 1860 and was elected representative in congress 
1867-1871. Yardley did not receive the appointment and was commissioned first 
lieutenant, Company K, One Hundred and Fourth Pennsylvania Volunteers. He 
was promoted to captain and provost marshal of the Fifth District, Pennsyl- 
vania, April 29, 1863. 

[327] 



Memorandum: Appointments at Boston 1 

April 11, 1861 
Isaac Clark wants two weeks delay of appointments at Boston. 

1 AE, DLC-RTL. Isaac Clark, candidate for surveyor of the port of Boston, 
wrote April 10, 1861, asking "two weeks delay . . . for the purpose of coming 
to some satisfactory arrangement among ourselves. . . ." (DLC-B.TL). 

Memorandum: Maryland Appointments 1 

April 11, 1861 

Gov. Hicks, on the nth. of April 1861, advises that Maryland 
appointments be delayed 8 or 10 days. He also recommends that, 
as to such appointments, I take the advice of H. W. Davis, Thomas 
Swann, J. Bond Chaplin, and W. H. Purnell. 2 

I wish French S. Evans to be deputy collector, or deputy Naval 
officer. 3 

1 AD, DLC-RTL. 

2 Representative Henry "Winter Davis, President Thomas Swann of the Balti- 
more and Ohio Railroad, and William H. Purnell, whom Lincoln appointed 
postmaster at Baltimore. J. Bond Chaplin has not been identified. 

3 This is written on the verso. Evans was appointed deputy naval officer. 



Order Designating the National 

Executive Department, Washington April nth 1861. 
In virtue of his authority to designate at discretion one news- 
paper in the city of Washington for the publication of notices and 
advertisements from the Executive departments, in addition to the 
two entitled to such publication, by having the largest permanent 
subscription, (U.S. Statutes, Vol. 5, page 795,) the President desig- 
nates the "National Republican," and his private secretary will 
communicate this order to the several Executive departments. 2 

ABRAHAM: 



Although 3 I do not perceive the necessity of it, I have no objec- 
tion to say the above designation is to stand, until further order, 
notwithstanding any change of proprietors which may have oc- 
curred. A. LINCOLN 

Feb. 16. 1863. 

1 DS and AES, RPB. 2 Nicolay wrote the letters on April 19. 

3 This endorsement appears on the bottom of the page and is reproduced here 
rather than under its chronological date. "William J. Murtaugh became pub- 
lisher of the Republican in 1863. 

[328] 



To Edward Bates 1 

Hon. Atty, General Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: April 12, 1861 

On examination of papers, and full consideration^ I have con- 
cluded to appoint Earl Bill, Marshal for the Northern District of 
Ohio. Please send me the commission. Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

i ALS-P, ISLA. Earl Bill of Tiffin, Ohio, had served one term (1850-1851) in 
the Ohio Senate and was a delegate to the Chicago convention in 1860. 

To Edward Bates 1 

Hon. Atty. General. Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: April 12, 1861 

The two Senators of Penn. with the brief before them recom- 
mend Alexander Murdoch for Marshall of the Western District, 
and Robert B. Carnahan, for Attorney of the same District. Send 
me the Commissions. Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

1 Copy, ISLA. Alexander Murdoch of Washington, Pennsylvania, and Robert 
B. Carnahan of Pittsburgh received the appointments designated. 

Memorandum : 
Appointment of Thomas Webster, Jr. 1 

April 12, 1861 
The above named gentlemen appear in person and press for the 

appointment of Thomas Webster Jr. as Collector of the Port at 

Philadelphia. 

They say his appointment will give general satisfaction, while 

that of no other person will. 
April 12, 1861. 

1 AE, DLC-RTL. The endorsement is written on the bottom of a list of sixteen 
names headed "Delegation of Philadelphia Merchants." Thomas Webster was 
not appointed, Chase's selection being William B. Thomas, wealthy flour manu- 
facturer and abolitionist. 

Reply to a Committee 
from the Virginia Convention 1 

[April 13, 1861] 

Hon: William Ballard Preston, Alexander H. H. Stuart, 
& George W. Randolph, Esq 

Gentlemen: As a committee of the Virginia convention, now in 
session, you present me a preamble and resolution, in these words: 

Whereas, 2 in the opinion of this Convention the uncertainty which 
prevails in the public mind as to the policy which the Federal Execu- 

[329] 



APRIL 13, l86l 

tive intends to pursue toward the seceded States is extremely injurious 
to the industrial and commercial interests of the country; tends to keep 
up an excitement -which is unfavorable to the adjustment of pending 
difficulties, and threatens a disturbance of the public peace; therefore 
Resolved, that a committee of three delegates be appointed by this Con- 
vention to wait upon the President of the United States, present to 
him this preamble and resolution, and respectfully ask of him to com- 
municate to this Convention the policy which the Federal Executive 
intends to pursue in regard to the Confederate States. 

Adopted by the Convention of the State of Virginia, Richmond, 
April 8th 1861 

In pursuance of the foregoing resolution, the following delegates 
were appointed to constitute said committee. 
Hon. William Ballard Preston. 
Hon. Alexander H. H. Stuart. 
George W. Randolph Esq. 

JOHN JANNEY PRESIDENT 
L. EUBANK SECRETARY. 



In answer I have to say, that having, at the beginning of my 
official term, expressed my intended policy, as plainly as I was 
able, it is with deep regret, and some mortification, I now learn, 
that there is great, and injurious uncertainty, in the public mind, 
as to what that policy is, and what course I intend to pursue. Not 
having, as yet, seen occasion to change, it is now my purpose to 
pursue the course marked out in the inaugeral address. I commend 
a careful consideration of the whole document, as the best ex- 
pression I can give of my purposes. As I then, and therein, said, I 
now repeat: 

"The power confided to me will be used to hold, occupy, and 
possess, the property, and places belonging to the Government, and 
to collect the duties, and imposts; but, beyond what is necessary 
for these objects, there will be no invasion no using of force 
against, or among the people anywhere" 

By the words "property, and places, belonging to the Govern- 
ment" I chiefly allude to the military posts, and property, which 
were in the possession of the Government when it came to my 
hands. But 3 if, as now appears to be true, in pursuit of a purpose 
to drive the United States authority from these places, an unpro- 
voked assault, has been made upon Fort-Sumpter, I shall hold my- 
self at liberty to re-possess, if I can, like places which had been 
seized before the Government was devolved upon me. 

And, in every event, I shall, to the extent of ray ability, repel 
force by force. 

In case it proves true, that Fort-Sumpter has been assaulted, as 
is reported, I shall perhaps, cause the United [States] mails to be 

[330] 



APRIL 15., l86l 

withdrawn frora all the States which, claim to have seceded be- 
lieving that the commencement of actual war against the Govern- 
ment., justifies and possibly demands this, 

I scarcely need to say that I consider the Military posts and 
property situated within the states, \vhich claim to have seceded, as 
yet belonging to the Government of the United States, as much as 
they did before the supposed secession. 

Whatever else I may do for the purpose, I shall not attempt to 
collect the duties, and imposts, by any armed Invasion of any part 
of the country not meaning by this, however, that I may not 
land a force, deemed necessary, to relieve a fort upon a border of 
the country. From the fact, that I have quoted a part of the inau- 
geral address, it must not be infered that I repudiate any other 
part, the whole of which I re-affirm, except so far as what I now 
say of the mails, may be regarded as a modification, 

1 ADf, DLC-RTL. William B. Preston was elected to the Confederate Con- 
"gress in 1861, and Alexander H. BL Stuart "was a member of the Virginia Sen- 

ate; General George W. Randolph, later secretary of war for the Confederacy 
(1862-1863), represented Virginia's military forces. 

2 The single page preamble and resolution is attached to Lincoln's reply. 

3 The remainder of this paragraph and the next two are inserted replacing the 
following: "But if, by efforts to drive the United States forces from, these places., 
either by assault or starvation, a collision of arms shall be occasioned, I shall 
hold myself at liberty to re-possess, if I can, like places which had been seized 
before the Government was devolved upon me." Fort Sumter had been at- 
tacked on April 12. 

To Winfield Scott C?) 1 

[April 14, 1861] 
Please send over the Ft. Sumpter Messenger at once. 



1 ALS, DLC-RTL,. The date of this note is that assigned to it in the Lincoln 
Papers. 

Proclamation Calling Militia and 
Convening Congress 1 

April 15, 1861 

By the President of the United States 
A Proclamation. 

Whereas the laws of the United States have been for some time 
past, and now are opposed, and the execution thereof obstructed, 

[331] 



APRIL 15, l86l 

in the States of South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Florida, Missis- 
sippi, Louisiana and Texas, by combinations too powerful to be 
suppressed by the ordinary course of judicial proceedings, or by the 
powers vested in the Marshals by law, 

Now therefore, I, Abraham Lincoln, President of the United 
States, in virtue of the power in me vested by the Constitution, and 
the laws, have thought fit to call forth, and hereby do call forth, 
the militia of the several States of the Union, to the aggregate 
number of seventy-five thousand, in order to suppress said combi- 
nations, and to cause the laws to be duly executed. The details, for 
this object, will be immediately communicated to the State author- 
ities through the War Department. 

I appeal to all loyal citizens to favor, facilitate and aid this ef- 
fort to maintain the honor, the integrity, and the existence of our 
National Union, and the perpetuity of popular government; and 
to redress 2 wrongs already long enough endured. 

I deem it proper to say that the first service assigned to the 
forces hereby called forth will probably be to re-possess the forts, 
places, and property which have been seized from the Union; and 
in every event, the utmost care will be observed, consistently with 
the objects aforesaid, to avoid any devastation, any destruction of, 
or interference with, property, or any disturbance of peaceful citi- 
zens in any part of the country. 

And I hereby command the persons composing the combinations 
aforesaid to disperse, and retire peaceably to their respective 
abodes within twenty days from this date. 

Deeming that the present condition of public affairs presents an 
extraordinary occasion, I 3 do hereby, in virtue of the power in me 
vested by the Constitution, 4 convene both Houses of Congress. Sen- 
ators and Representatives are therefore summoned to assemble at 
their respective chambers, at 12 o'clock, noon, on Thursday, the 
fourth day of July, next, then and there to consider and deter- 
mine, such measures, as, in their wisdom, the public safety, and in- 
terest may seem to demand. 

In Witness Whereof I have hereunto set nay hand, and caused 
the Seal of the United States to be affixed. 

Done at the city of Washington this fifteenth day 
of April in the year of our Lord One thousand, Eight 
[L.S.] hundred and Sixty-one, and of the Independence of 

the United States the Eighty-fifth. 

ABRABLAJVC 

By the President 

"WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of State. 

[332] 



APRIL 5, l86l 

1 DS, DNA FS RG 11, Proclamations; ADf, DLC-RTL. The official copy in 
the Archives is not in Lincoln's handwriting but bears emendations hi Ms hand- 
writing as indicated in footnotes. 

2 "Redress its wrongs already too long endured" emended by Lincoln as re- 
produced. 3 "I do hereby," inserted by Lincoln. 

4 "I do hereby" deleted at this point by Lincoln. 



To William Dennison 1 

April 15, 1861 
Thirteen Regiments. 

1 OR, III, I, 73. Governor Dennison telegraphed "What portion of the 75,000 
militia ... do you give to Ohio? Great rejoicing here over your proclama- 
tion. . . . 



To Elmer E. EUsworth 1 

Col. E. E. Ellsworth Washington, 

My dear Sir: April 15. 1861 

Ever since the beginning of our acquaintance, I have valued 
you highly as a person [al] friend, and at the same time (without 
much capacity of judging) have had a very high estimate of your 
military talent. Accordingly I have been, and still am anxious for 
you to have the best position in the military which can be given 
you, consistently with justice and proper courtesy towards the 
older officers of the army. I can not incur the risk of doing them 
injustice, or a discourtesy; but I do say they would personally 
oblige me, if they could, and would place you in some position, or 
in some service, satisfactory to yourself . Your Obt. Servt. 

A. Lnsrcoi-N 

1 ALS-F, ISLA. Concerning Ellsworth's appointment see Lincoln to Cameron, 
March 5, supra and note. 



To Henry W. Hoffman 1 

[c. April 15, 1861] 

If there is any secessionist in your department, I wish you 
would remove him, and give the place to Mr. S. C. Atkinson; or, 
if, in any way you can give him a place, I shall be obliged. 
Mr. Huffman, Collector. A. 



1 ALS, The Rosenbach Company, Philadelphia and New York. Henry W. 
Hoffman was appointed April 15, 1861, and this communication, seems to have 
been written near that date. S. C. Atkinson has not been identified. 

[333] 



Memorandum : 
Appointment of Newell A. Thompson 1 

[c. April 15, 1861] 

Hon. George Ashmun, especially desires Newell A. Thompson 
to be Navy Agent at Boston. 

1 AE, DLC-RTL. The endorsement is written on the back of Ashmun to Lin- 
coln, April 15, 1861, recommending Colonel Thompson. Eugene L Norton of 
Boston received the appointment instead of Thompson. 



Memorandum: New York Appointments 1 

[c. April 15, 1861] 

Collector Hiram Barney R.D. 

Surveyor [Abram] Wakeman S.W. 

Naval O. George Dennison [szc] W. 

Apr. GenL Tho. McElrath S. W. 

Navy A. [D.D.T.] Marshall R.D. 

[Isaac] Henderson 

Mint. [Daniel?] Ullmann 2 Am. 

Sub. Treas. [Richard M.] Blatchford S.W. 

Attorney E. Del. Smith S.W. 

Marshall. Henry B. Stanton R.D. 

P. Master. James Taylor. 3 S.W. 

1 AD, NAuE; copy, DLC-RTL. The copy is dated by Nicolay, April 30, 1861, 
but Chase to Lincoln, April 15, indicates a conference on the New York ap- 
pointments on this date (DLC-RTL), and other references confirm April 15 as 
the date of this particular slate of New York appointments. The designation 
"S.W." probably meant "Seward-Weed" and "Am" following "Ullmann" would 
suggest "American or Know-Nothing," and "R D." was perhaps "Reformed 
Democrat." 

2 This may have been John J. TJllmann rather than Daniel Ullmann. 

3 Probably an error for William B. Taylor, Seward's choice, who received the 
appointment. 



To Winfield Scott 1 

Lieut. General Scott: Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: April 15. 1861 

CoL Peter G. Washington tells me it is my duty to call an offi- 
cer to the command of the District of Columbia militia now in the 
U.S. service, and that he, by rank in the District of militia, is en- 
titled to the place. 

Is it my duty to call, or designate, such officer? and if yea, is 

[334] 



APRIL 16, l86l 

CoL Washington, by military law usage, or courtesy, entitled to 
the place? 

Please investigate & inform me Your Obt. Servt. 

A. 



1 ALS, DLC-RTL. Charles E Stone, inspector general, endorsed the letter as 
follows: "Col "Washington was an officer of the old Organization . . . but that 
organization has been legally broken up and replaced by a new one. . . ." 
Scott's endorsement specified that "... we do not want him or any other field 
officer, with the District Volunteers mustered into the service of the U.S. be- 
cause those volunteers are doing duty as separate & independent companies, & 
require no field officer. . . .*' {Ibid.}. 



To Gideon Welles 1 

Hon. Sec. of Navy, Executive Mansion. 

My dear Sir: April 15, 1861. 

I must relieve myself of the remaining California appointments. 
The charge against Samuel Bell is unsustained, and, in fact, in a 
good degree, disproved. I therefore request that you send me a 
Commission for him as Navy Agent Very truly, 

A. 



1 Angle, pp. 267-68. Samuel Bell had served as comptroller of California and 
was a delegate to the Chicago convention in 1860, Eugene L. Sullivan to Welles, 
March 15, 1861, asks that his previous letter of recommendation for Bell be 
withdrawn: *'. . . I have learned . . . his record as Comptroller of the State 
of California is not altogether clear." (DLC-RTL). See also Lincoln to Welles, 
May 8, infra, concerning Bell's appointment. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War: Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir April 16. 1861 

Some time ago I requested that Ben. Hardin Helm, might be 
appointed a Pay-Master, which I still desire. 2 

Next to this, for the sake of my friend, Major Hunter 9 I espe- 
cially wish Robert A. Kinzie 3 to be appointed a Pay-Master. This 
is not a formality, but an earnest reality. Your Obt. Servt. 

A. 



1 ALS, DLC-Cameron Papers. 

2 Mrs. Lincoln's "brother-in-law accepted a commission in the Confederate 
Army, was promoted to brigadier general, and died of wounds received at 
Chiokamauga, September 21, 1863. 

3 Robert A. Kinzie, David Hunter's brother-in-law, had migrated to Kansas in 
1847. 3He was appointed paymaster with rant of major, May 2. 

[335] 



Memorandum: Retention of Fletcher Webster 1 

[c. April 16, 1861] 

Hon. Geo. Ashmun, especially wishes that Fletcher Webster 
may be allowed to serve out his term. 

1 AE, DL.C-RTL. Aslunun to Lincoln, April 16, 1861, requested retention of 
Daniel Webster's son Fletcher as surveyor of Port of Boston. Fletcher Webster 
became colonel of the Twelfth Massachusetts, June 26, 1861, and was killed at 
the second battle of Bull Run in August, 1862. 



To Edward Bates 1 

Hon. Atty. Gen. Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: April 17, 1861 

Two of the Judges for Nebraska have been appointed. 2 Please 
send me your Briefs as to the remaining Judge and the Attorney & 
Marshal. Yours truly, A. 



1 ALS, owned by Ashley T. Cole, New York City. 

2 See memorandum on appointments to territories, March 20, supra. Lincoln 
appointed William F. Lockwood of Dakota City to the remaining judgeship, 
David L. Collier of Omaha as attorney, and Phineas W. Hitchcock of Omaha 
as marshal. 



Memorandum: Appointment of Albert G. Enos 1 

April 17, 1861 

I have but very slight acquaintance with Mr. Enos, but, Col. 
Gridly who writes the accompanying letter, is my intimate political 
& personal friend, whom I would like to obliged [szc] . 
April 17, 1861. A. 



1 Parke-Beraet Catalog 905, December 1-2, 1947, No. 275. Gridley was un- 
doubtedly Lincoln's friend Asahel Gridley of Bloomington, Illinois. Albert G. 
Enos, on the back of whose letter the endorsement is written, was commissioned 
major of the Eighth Pennsylvania regiment, September 18, 1861, resigned Oc- 
tober 5, 1862. 



To WiUiam H. Seward 1 

Hon. Sec. of State Executive Mansion 

Dear Sir April 17 1861 

The Gov. of Nebraska has been appointed. Will you please send 
me your Brief for Secretary of that Territory? Yours truly 

A. 

[336] 



APRIL l8, l86l 

1 ALS, NAuE. Alvin Saunders of Mount Pleasant, Iowa, had been ap- 
pointed Governor. See Lincoln to Seward, April 27, infra, for Lincoln's ap- 
pointment of Algernon S. Paddock as secretary. 



To Gideon Welles 1 

Hon. Gideon Welles. Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: April 17. 1861 

I have no reason to doubt that Mr. James S. Ghalker, the bearer 
of this, is, as he says, the author of the ""Wide Awake," order. As 
he is your townsman, you will know; and if it is all straight, please 
add your recommendation to mine, that he have some suitable ap- 
pointment in the Army, which he desires. "When you shall [have] 
added your -word, send the whole to the War Department. Yours 
truly A, LINCOLN 

1 ALS, The Rosenbach Company, Philadelphia and New York. No record of 
James S. Chalker's appointment has been found. 



To William H. Seward 1 

Hon. W. H. Seward. Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir April 18. 1861 

You astonish me by saying Mr. "Weed understands there is some 
alienation, or enmity of feeling, on my part towards him. Noth- 
ing like it. I shall be glad to see him any time, & have wondered 
at not have [szc] seen [him] here already. Yours very truly 

A. LINCOLN 

i ALS, NN. 

To Edward Wallace 1 

Dr. Edward Wallace Executive Mansion 

Dear Sir April 18. 1861 

Having, to-day concluded to appoint you Naval Officer at Phila- 
delphia, I now, at the request of Dr. Luther, 2 a strong and honor- 
able competitor of yours, and at the urgent request of Gen. Cam- 
eron also, earnestly solicit you to appoint Col. John C. Meyers, of 
your own city, the deputy Naval officer. You will personally oblige 
me by doing this, besides smoothing things which otherwise might 
be a little rough 3 Yours very truly A LINCOLN 

1 ALS IHi. 2 Dr. Diller Luther of Reading, Pennsylvania. 

3 Jolin C. Myers was not appointed. Deputy naval officer of Philadelphia as 
of September 30, 1861, was David F. Williams. 

[337] 



To Gideon Welles 1 

Hon. Sec. of Navy Executive Mansion 
Dear Sir April 18. 1861 

Be here on Philadelphia appointments, at 12. o'clock to-day. 
Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, Ct. See Lincoln to Wallace, supra 

Memorandum 1 

No report from Gen. Scott this 19. April 1861. 

1 AE, DLC-RTL. Beginning April i, on General Scott's reports Lincoln en- 
dorsed "Genl. Scott's daily report No. i," etc. The reports continued until 
May 4, the last being No. 24. 

Proclamation of a Blockade 1 

April 19, 1861 
By the President of the United States of America: 

A Proclamation. 

Whereas an insurrection against the Government of the United 
States has broken out in the States of South Carolina, Georgia, Ala- 
bama, Florida, Mississippi, Louisiana, and Texas, and the laws of 
the United States for the collection of the revenue cannot be effec- 
tually executed therein conformably to that provision of the Con- 
stitution which requires duties to be uniform throughout the 
United States: 

And whereas a combination of persons engaged in such insur- 
rection, have threatened to grant pretended letters of marque to 
authorize the bearers thereof to commit assaults on the lives, ves- 
sels, and property of good citizens of the country lawfully engaged 
in commerce on the high seas, and in waters of the United States: 
And whereas an Executive Proclamation has been already issued, 
requiring the persons engaged in these disorderly proceedings to 
desist therefrom, calling out a militia force for the purpose of re- 
pressing the same, and convening Congress in extraordinary ses- 
sion, to deliberate and determine thereon: 

Now, therefore, I, Abraham Lincoln, President of the United 
States, with a view to the same purposes before mentioned, and to 
the protection of the public peace, and the lives and property of 
quiet and orderly citizens pursuing their lawful occupations, until 
Congress shall have assembled and deliberated on the said unlaw- 

[338] 



APRIL IQ., l86l 

ful proceedings, or until the same shall have ceased, have further 
deemed it advisable to set on foot a blockade of the ports 'within 
the States aforesaid, in pursuance of the laws of the United States, 
and of the law of Nations, in such case provided. For this purpose 
a competent force will be posted so as to prevent entrance and 
exit of vessels from the ports aforesaid. If, therefore, with a view- 
to violate such blockade, a vessel shall approach, or shall attempt 
to leave either of the said ports, she will be duly warned by the 
Commander of one of the blockading vessels, who will endorse on 
her register the fact and date of such warning, and if the same 
vessel shall again attempt to enter or leave the blockaded port, she 
will be captured and sent to the nearest convenient port, for such 
proceedings against her and her cargo as prize, as may be deemed 
advisable. 

And I hereby proclaim and declare that if any person, under 
the pretended authority of the said States, or under any other pre- 
tense, shall molest a vessel of the United States, or the persons or 
cargo on board of her, such person will be held amenable to the 
laws of the United States for the prevention and punishment of 
piracy. 

In witness "whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, and caused 
the seal of the United States to be affixed. 

Done at the City of Washington, this nineteenth 
day of April, in the year of our Lord one thousand 
[L.S.] eight hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence 

of the United States the eighty-fifth. 

ABRAHAM: LINCOLN* 

By the President: 

WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of State 

* DS, DNA FS RG 11, Proclamations. 



Inscription in Album 
of Mary Rebecca Darby Smith 1 

"White House, April 19, 1861. 

Whoever in later-times shall see this, and look at the date, will 
readily excuse the writer for not having indulged in sentiment, or 
poetry. With all kind regards for Miss Smith. A. 



* Parke-Bexnet Catalog 1026, January 10-11, 1949* No. 56. According to the 
source Miss Smith was a friend of President Buchanan's who attended Lincoln's 
inaugural and called on the new president on April 19. 

[339] 



To Gideon Welles 1 

Hon. Sec. of Navy Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir April 19, 1861 

I find on page 99 of the Navy Register that there is an officer 
called "Naval Constructor," whom it is said, you are to appoint. 

The bearer of this, Israel S. Smith, a man now residing at Phila- 
delphia, but whom I knew in boyhood, and whom I would like to 
oblige, is anxious and interested to have John W. Griffiths, ap- 
pointed to that office. Please examine, and appoint him, if it can 
properly be done. Yours truly A. Lirrcouxr 

1 ALS, The Rosenlbach Company, Philadelphia and New York. See memo- 
randum on appointment of Griffiths, c. April i, supra. 



To Thomas H. Hicks and George W. Brown 1 

Gov. Hicks, & Mayor Brown Washington, April 20. 1861 

Gentlemen: Your letter by Messrs. Bond, Dobbin & Brume, is re- 
ceived. I tender you both my sincere thanks for your efforts to keep 
the peace in the trying situation in which you are placed. For the 
future, troops must be brought here, but I make no point of bring- 
ing them through Baltimore. Without any military knowledge my- 
self, of course I must leave details to Gen. Scott. He hastily said, 
this morning, in presence of these gentlemen, "March them 
around Baltimore, and not through it." I sincerely hope the Gen- 
eral, on fuller reflection, will consider this practical and proper, 
and that you will not object to it. By this, a collision of the people 
of Baltimore -with the troops will be avoided, unless they go out 
of their way to seek it. I hope you will exert your influence to pre- 
vent this. 

Now, and ever, I shall do all in my power for peace, consistently 
with the maintainance of government. Your Obt. Servt. 

A. LIKTCOUNT 

1 ALS, Carnegie Institute Museum, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Mayor 
Brown of Baltimore sent Hugh L. Bond, George W. Dobbin, and John C. Brune 
with a letter dated April 18, 1861, **. . . to explain fully the fearful condition 
of affairs in this city. The people are exasperated ... by the passage of troops, 
and . . . are decided in the opinion that no more should be ordered to come. 
... It is my solemn duty to inform you that it is not possible for more soldiers 
to pass through Baltimore unless they fight their way at every step. . . .** On 
April 19, a telegram signed by Governor Hicks and Mayor Brown notified Lin- 
coln of a collision between citizens of Baltimore and troops. On April 20, 
Brown acknowledged receipt of Lincoln's letter carried by Bond, Dobbin, and 
Brune, and promised to preserve the peace if "... no more troops will be 
brought through the city. . . ." (DLG-RTL). A secessionist mob of Baltimore 

[340] 



APRIL 22, l86l 

had fired into Massachusetts troops forced to march through the city because of 
obstructions placed on the track by the mob. Approximately four soldiers and 
nine citizens -were killed and rioting continued for several days. 



To Thomas H. Hicks and George W. Brown 1 

Washington, April 20, 1861 

Gov. Hicks, I desire to consult "with you and the Mayor of Balti- 
more relative to preserving the peace of Maryland, Please come 
immediately by special train, which you can take at Baltimore, or 
if necessary one can be sent from hence. Answer forthwith. 



1 Copy, MdAA-Executive Letter Book (1854-1866), p. 195. The same tele- 
gram was sent to both Governor Hicks and Mayor Brown after the dispatch of 
the letter supra. Governor Hicks was not in Baltimore, but Brown telegraphed 
that he was "coming immediately." (DLC-RTL) . According to The (Baltimore) 
South, April 22, and New York Tribune, April 24, George W. Dobbin, John G. 
Bnme and S. T. Wallis accompanied Mayor Brown. Governor Hicks wrote 
Lincoln April 22, protesting further landing of troops at Annapolis and sug- 
gesting that the British minister, Lord Lyons ". . . be requested to act as medi- 
ator between the contending parties of our country." (DLG-RTL). Seward re- 
plied at Lincoln's direction that ". . . the national highway thus selected by the 
Lieutenant General has been chosen by him upon consultation with prominent 
magistrates and citizens of Maryland, as the one which, while a route is abso- 
lutely necessary, is further removed from the populous cities of the State, and 
with the expectation that it would, therefore, be the least objectionable one." He 
added that ". . . no domestic contention . . . ought, in any case, to be re- 
ferred to any foreign arbitrament. . . ." (New York Tribune, April 24, 1861). 
A statement issued by Mayor Brown, April 21, as printed in The South, April 
22, reported Lincoln's remarks during the interview on April 20 in substantial 
agreement with Lincoln's letter dispatched earlier on the same day, supra. 



Reply to Baltimore Committee 1 

April 22, 1861 

You, gentlemen, come here to me and ask for peace on any 
terms, and yet have no -word of condemnation for those who are 
making war on us. You express great horror of bloodshed, and yet 
would not lay a straw in the way of those who are organizing in 
Virginia and elsewhere to capture this city. The rebels attack Fort 
Sumter, and your citizens attack troops sent to the defense of the 
Government, and the lives and property in Washington, and yet 
you would have me break my oath and surrender the Government 
without a blow. There is no Washington in that no Jackson in 
that no manhood nor honor in that. I have no desire to invade 
the South 9 but I must have troops to defend this Capital. Geograph- 
ically it lies surrounded by the soil of Maryland; and mathemati- 

[341] 



APRIL 23, l86l 

cally the necessity exists that they should come over her territory. 
Our men are not moles, and can't dig under the earth; they are not 
birds, and can't fly through the air. There is no way but to inarch 
across, and that they must do. But in doing this there is no need of 
collision. Keep your rowdies in Baltimore, and there will be no 
bloodshed. Go home and tell your people that if they will not at- 
tack us, we will not attack them; but if they do attack us, we will 
return it, and that severely. 

l Hertz, II, 830-31. Although the source of Lincoln's remarks as printed by 
Hertz is probably a newspaper, the editors have been unable to locate it Hertz 
dates the event April 28, 1861, but reports in the Baltimore Daily Exchange 
and The South, April 23, 1861, indicate conclusively that this reply was made 
to a committee of fifty representing the Young Men's Christian Associations of 
Baltimore on Monday, April 22. Reports in the Philadelphia and New York 
papers as well as the Baltimore papers give only fragments of Lincoln's re- 
marks as printed by Hertz, and the editors have reproduced the Hertz text for 
want of a satisfactory contemporary source. 

To Gideon Welles 1 

Hon. Secretary of Navy, Executive Mansion, April 23, 1861. 

Dear Sir: I think I saw three "vessels go up to the Navy Yard just 
now. Will you please send down and learn what they are? Yours 

truly A. LI3NTCOL3NT 

1 Tracy, p. 180. There is no reply in the Lincoln Papers. 

To Montgomery Blair 1 

Hon. EM. General, Executive Mansion, April 24, 1861. 

My dear Sir: Near a week ago, it was settled for Cornelius Wai- 
born to be Post-Master at Philadelphia. Has the actual appoint- 
ment been made? I have the papers in the case from your Depart- 
ment lying by me, and will sign and send them over, if you say 
so. Your obed't Serv't, A. 



1 Tracy, p. 181. Cornelius Walborn had been appointed April 20, on Simon 
Cameron's personal recommendation. 

To Reverdy Johnson 1 

Confidential. 
Hon. Reverdy Johnson Executive Mansion, April 24th 1861. 

My dear Sir: Your note of this morning is just received. I fore- 
bore to answer yours of the 22d because of my aversion (which I 
thought you understood,) to getting on paper, and furnishing new 
grounds for misunderstanding. 

[342] 



APRIL 25, l86l 

I do say the sole purpose of bringing troops here is to defend this 
capital. 

I do say I have no purpose to invade Virginia, with them or any 
other troops, as I understand the -word invasion. But suppose Vir- 
ginia sends her troops, or admits others through her borders, to as- 
sail this capital, am I not to repel them, even to the crossing of the 
Potomac if I can? 

Suppose Virginia erects, or permits to be erected, batteries on the 
opposite shore, to bombard the city, are we to stand still and see 
it done? In a word, if Virginia strikes us, are we not to strike back, 
and as effectively as we can? 

Again, are we not to hold Fort Monroe (for instance) if we can? 
I have no objection to declare a thousand times that I have no 
purpose to invade Virginia or any other State, but I do not mean 
to let them invade us without striking back. Yours truly 

A. 



1 Copy, DL.C-KTL. Maryland's ex-senator (1845-1849) and recent delegate 
to the Peace Conference wrote on April 24 that he desired an answer to his let- 
ter of April 22 before he left Washington. A contemporary copy of the earlier 
letter made by Joseph Holt, in the Lincoln Papers, reads in part as follows: 
". . . . The existing excitement and alarm ... of my own State and of Vir- 
ginia are owing ... to an apprehension that it is your purpose to use the 
military force you are assembling in this District for the invasion of ... these 
States. . . ." (DLC-RTL). 

Memorandum: Retirement of John EL "Wright 
and William H. Swift 1 

April 24, 1861 

Let Surgeon [John] H. Wright and Surgeon "William Swift be 
placed on the retired list, as within recommended by the Secretary 
of the Navy. A. LINCOLN. 

April 24, 1861 

1 AES, DNA WR NB RG 45, Executive Letters, No. 75. "Welles to Lincoln, 
April 24, on which Lincoln's endorsement is written, recommends the action 
taken. "Wright had served from December 9, 1839; Swift, from July 24, 1813. 

Memorandum : 
Operation of the Chicopee Works 1 

[c. April 25, 1861] 

Let the suggestion of the Vice-President as to putting the Chico- 
pee works into operation be duly considered by the War Depart- 
ment. A. 

[343] 



APRIL 25, l86l 

1 OR, III, I, 106. Lincoln's endorsement is on Hamlin's letter of April 23, 
written from New York, which reads in part, ". . . "We are sadly deficient, 
and we want and need and should have rifled cannon. Let me urge earnestly 
and frankly that the works at Chicopee [Massachusetts] be put in operation to 
their utmost capacity to furnish them." 

To Winfield Scott 1 

Lieutenant General Scott Washington, April 25 1861. 

My dear Sir: The Maryland Legislature assembles to-morrow at 
Anapolis; and, not improbably, will take action to arm the people 
of that State against the United States. The question has been sub- 
mitted to, and considered by me, whether it would not be justifi- 
able, upon the ground of necessary defence, for you, as commander 
in Chief of the United States Army, to arrest, or disperse the mem- 
bers of that body. I think it -would not be justifiable; nor, efficient 
for the desired object. 

First, they have a clearly legal right to assemble; and, we can 
not know in advance, that their action -will not be lawful, and 
peaceful. And if we wait until they shall have acted, their arrest, 
or dispersion, will not lessen the effect of their action. 

Secondly, we can not permanently prevent their action. If we 
arrest them, we can not long hold them as prisoners; and when lib- 
erated, they will immediately re-assemble, and take their action. 
And, precisely the same if we simply disperse them. They will im- 
mediately re-assemble in some other place. 

I therefore conclude that it is only left to the commanding Gen- 
eral to watch, and await their action, which, if it shall be to arm 
their people against the United States, he is to adopt the most 
prompt, and efficient means to counteract, even, if necessary, to the 
bombardment of their cities and in the extremest necessity, the 
suspension of the writ of habeas corpus. Your Obedient Servant 

ABRAHAM 



1 AL.S copy, DLC-RTL. Endorsed by Lincoln on envelope "Copy of letter to 
Genl. Scott," Upon assembling, the Maryland legislature appointed a committee 
to confer with, the president. See Lincoln's reply, May 4, infra. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of "War: Executive Mansion April 26. 1861 

I learn that the Gov. of Illinois, who is acquainted with Capt. 
John Pope, now at Cincinnati, desires to have Capt. Pope sent to 
Illinois to assist in the organization & equipment of the military 
forces of the State. 

[344] 



APRIL 27, l86l 

Are his present duties such that he could not properly be or- 
dered to report himself to Gov. Yates? If not, please direct him to 
report to Gov. Yates for duty. Yours truly A. LIINTCOLIN- 

(over) 

P.S. Capt. Todd 2 leaves for the West to-morrow afternoon; and, 
being an experienced military man, would bear and deliver any 
despaches confided to him. A. L. 

1 ALS, IHi. Pope wrote Lincoln, April 20, "The Governor of Illinois has 
telegraphed me to go on to Springfield at once to assist in the organization & 
equipment of the military forces of the State. ... I have therefore applied by 
this mail . . . for leave of absence for one year. . . .** (DLC-RTL). Pope's 
nomination as brigadier general of volunteers, May 17, was confirmed by the 
Senate August 5, 1861. 

2 Lockwood 3YL Todd. See Lincoln to Ira P. Rankin, April 5, supra. 



Reply to the Frontier Guard 1 

April 26, 1861 

I have desired as sincerely as any man I sometimes think more 
than any other man that our present difficulties might be settled 
without the shedding of blood. I will not say that all hope is yet 
gone. But if the alternative is presented, whether the Union is to be 
broken in fragments and the liberties of the people lost, or blood 
be shed, you will probably make the choice, with which I shall not 
be dissatisfied. 

1 New York Tribune, May i, 1861. "The Frontier Guard, under the corrraiand 
of Senator Lane of Kansas, numbering 150, and composed mostly of Kansas 
men, called on Mr. Lincoln on Friday. . . . Mr. Lincoln responded briefly, con- 
cluding as follows:" (ibid.). This item is misdated by Hertz (II, 830) April 28, 
and by Lapsley (V, 292) April 27. 



To Edward Bates 1 

Executive Mansion, 
Hon. Attorney General, April 27, 1861 

My dear Sir: I have concluded to appoint Lockwood, (I think 
you have his Christian name) to the remaining Judgeship in Ne- 
braska Territory. He resides there. Please send the commission. 
Yours truly, A. LIKTCOLI^. 

1 Thomas F. Madigan, A Catalogue of lAncolrdana (1929), p. 11. Lincoln ap- 
pointed "William F. Lock-wood of Dakota City, Nebraska Territory, a native of 
Ohio who had migrated to the territory in 1857. 

[345] 



Memorandum: Appointment of John T. Bunds 1 

Let the commission be made out according to the within recom- 
mendation. A LINCOLN 
April 27, 1861 

1 AES, DNA RG 60, Papers of the Attorney General, Appointments, Kansas, 
Box 465, The endorsement is written on the back of Samuel C. Pomeroy and 
James H. Lane to Lincoln, April 15, 1861, recommending appointment of John 
T. Burris as United States district attorney for Kansas. 

To Timothy Munroe 1 

Col. T. Monroe Executive Mansion 

Comr. 8th. Reg. Mass. V. M. April 27. 1861 

Sir: Yours in regard to fatigue dress for your command, has been 
received and sent to the War Department, with the expression of 
my wish that your request be complied with. 

Allow me now to tender you, and through you, the officers and 
men under your command, my sincere thanks for the zeal, energy 
and gallantry generally, and especially for the great efficiency, in 
opening the communication between the North and this city, dis- 
played by you and them Yours truly A. LiisrcoLiNr 

1 ALS-P, ISLA. Colonel Timothy Munroe, commander of the Eighth Massa- 
chusetts Volunteer Militia, resigned May 5, 1861, on account of age. His regi- 
ment had worn out their uniforms in repairing railroad track on their march 
from Annapolis to Washington. 

Proclamation of Blockade 1 

April 27, 1861 
By the President of the United States of America, 

A Proclamation. 

Whereas, for the reasons assigned in my Proclamation of the 
igth. instant, a blockade of the ports of the States of South Caro- 
lina, Georgia, Florida, Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas, 
was ordered to be established: 

And whereas, since that date, public property of the United 
States has been seized, the collection of the revenue obstructed, and 
duly commissioned officers of the United States while engaged in 
executing the orders of their superiors have been arrested and held 
in custody as prisoners or have been impeded in the discharge of 
their official duties without due legal process, by persons claiming 
to act under authorities of the States of 2 Virginia and North Caro- 

[346] 



APRIL 27, l86l 

lina, an efficient blockade of the ports of those States will also be 
established. 

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, and caused 
the seal of the United States to be affixed. 

Done at the City of Washington, this twenty-seventh 

day of April, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight 

[L.S.] hundred and sixty one, and of the Independence of the 

United States the eighty-fifth. ABRAHAM: LINCOLN 

By the President: 

WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of State. 

1 DS, DNA FS RG 11, Proclamations. 

2 "Maryland" deleted at this point. 

To Winfield Scott 1 

April 27, 1861 
To the Commanding General of the Army of the United States: 

You are engaged in repressing an insurrection against the laws of 
the United States. If at any point on or in the vicinity of the [any] 
military line, which is now [or which shall be] used between the 
City of Philadelphia and the City of Washington, via Perryville, 
Annapolis City, and Annapolis Junction, you find resistance which 
renders it necessary to suspend the writ of Habeas Corpus for the 
public safety, you, personally or through the officer in command 
at the point where the [at which] resistance occurs, are authorized 
to suspend that writ. ABRAHAM LINCOLN 

April 27 1861 

1 LS, is owned by Foreman M. Lebold, Chicago, Illinois. In addition to the 
signature the number "27" in the date line is in Lincoln's handwriting. As 
printed by Nicolay and Hay (VI, 258) this order lacks the phrase "via Perry- 
ville, Annapolis City, and Annapolis Junction," and differs in having the 
variant phrases which are bracketed in the text. 

To William H. Seward 1 

Hon. Secretary of State, Executive Mansion 

Dear Sir: April 27, 1861 

I have concluded to appoint A. S. Paddock of Nebraska Territory 
to be secretary of the territory. Please send the commission. Yours 
truly, A. LIISTCOLJNT 

1 Lincoln, Nebraska, Sunday Star, October 11, 1931. According to the ac- 
companying article in the Star, the original letter ". . . for some strange and 
unknown reason today is found among other old and significant documents in 
the Russian soviet government's public library in Leningrad. . . . Walter L. 
Locke, former editor of the Dayton, Ohio, News . . . chanced to see the let- 
ter. . . ." 

[347] 



To Whom It May Concern 1 

Whom it may concern Washington D.C. April 27. 1861 

The bearer of this, Hon. H. V. Sullivan resides, and for a long 
time has resided at Quincy, Illinois, and is a most respectable, and 
trust- worthy gentleman. A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, CSrnH. Henry V. Sullivan was a former editor of the Quincy, Illinois, 
Republican and proprietor of a mill at Quincy. 

To William H. Seward 1 

Hon. W. H. Seward: Executive Mansion 

Dear Sir April 29. 1861 

If you have no objection to Timothy G. Smith having one of the 
$2000 consulships remaining open in Russia, I have none. Yours 
truly A. LHNTCOUNT 

1 ALS, NAuE. Timothy C. Smith of Vermont was appointed consul at 
Odessa. 

To Caleb B. Smith 1 

Hon. Sec. of Interior Executive Mansion 

Dear Sir April 29, 1861 

If the Pawnee Indian Agency has not already been disposed of, 
send a commission for it, in favor of Henry W. DePuy, of Ne- 
braska Yours truly A. LINCOLN. 

1 ALS, RPB. A forged tracing of this letter is in the Huntington Library. 
Henry W. DePuy was a resident of Fontenelle, Dodge Coimty, Nebraska Ter- 
ritory. 

To Gideon Welles 1 

Hon. Secretary of the Navy, Executive Mansion, 

Sir: April 29. 1861 

You will please to have as strong a War Steamer as you can con- 
veniently put on that duty, to cruise upon the Potomac, and to 
look in upon, and, if practicable, examine the Bluff and vicinity, 
at what is called the White House, once or twice per day; and, in 
case of any attempt to erect a battery there, to drive away the party 
attempting it, if practicable; and, in every event to report daily to 
your Department, and to me. Your Obt. Servt. A. LINCOLN 

Private note. The above order I make at the suggestion of General 
Scott, 2 though the execution of it, I believe is substantially what 
you are already doing A. L. 

[348] 



APRIL 30, l86l 

* ALS-P, ISLA. A forgery of this letter, addressed to General A. H. Terry, 
dated October i, 1863, is in the New York Public Library. 

2 The suggestion is contained in Scott's daily report, No. 20, April 26, 1861 
(DLC-RTL). 



Memorandum : 

Appointment of Stephen A. HLirlbut 1 

The writer of this letter is especially worthy of attention. In any- 
thing further done for Illinois., let him not be neglected. 
April 30, 1861. A, 



!AES, DLC-Nicolay Papers. Hurlbut wrote April 23, ". . . The Six Regi- 
ments of Illinois are more than full. Seventy Companies are rejected mine 
among them. . . . We "will relieve the Regulars from the frontier, or act any 
where else, but we must act or spoil. . . .** (I bid.}. Hurlbut was commis- 
sioned brigadier general of volunteers, May 17, 1861. 



To Caleb B. Smith 1 

Executive Mansion, 
Secretary of the Interior. Washington April 30, 1861. 

Dear Sir: Send Commissions as follows: Register of Land Office 
at Sante Fe, N.M., Joel Houghton, in place of O. H. Perry Richard- 
son, removed. 

Indian Agent at Sante Fe 3 John Ward, in place of Silas Ken- 
drick, 2 removed. 

Indian Agent, Ramon Luna, in place of John L. Russell, 3 re- 
moved. 

Indian Agent, Jose Antonio Maurinares, 4 in place of Diego 
Archuletta, removed. 

If you and Mr. Dole 5 approve the above, let the Commissions he 
sent. Yours truly, A. LiisrcouNr, 

1 Tracy, p. 180; Hertz, II, 832; Parke-Bernet Catalog 1352, May 27, 1952, 
No. 166. Tracy misdates April 13; others give April 30. John S. Watts to Lin- 
coln, April 2, 1861,^ listed the New Mexico appointments, for which Lincoln 
ordered commissions* in this letter, as ". . . agreed upon between Mr. Otero the 
Delegate of New Mexico and myself. . . ." (DLC-RTL). Smith to Lincoln, 
April 29, indicated that "Judge Watts is anxious to return home & I shall be 
pleased if you will make some local appointments upon his recommendation. 
. . ." (DLC-RTL). 

2 Watts lists "Silas F. Kendrick." 

3 "Watts lists "John T. Russell." 

4 Watts lists the name as "Mausinaries," and the U. S. Official Register^ 1861, 
gives it as "Mausinares." 

5 William. P. Dole, commissioner of Indian affairs. 

[349] 



To Joseph G. Totten 1 

Executive Mansion April 30. 1861 

The President will thank Gen. Totten for a brief interview with 
him here. 

1 AL, EPB. Joseph G. Totten was chief of engineers of the U. S. Army and 
held ex-officio supervision of the U. S. Military Academy at West Point. 

To Robert Anderson 1 

Major Robert Anderson Washington, D.C. 

My dear Sir May i. 1861 

A few days ago I caused an official letter to be written you through 
the War Department, 2 expressive of the approbation and gratitude 
I considered due you and your command from this Government. 

I now write this, as a purely private and social letter, to say I 
shall be much gratified to see you here at your earliest convenience, 
when and where I can personally testify my appreciation of your 
services and fidelity; and, perhaps, explain some things on my part, 
which you may not have understood. 

I shall also be very glad to see any of the officers who served 
with you at Fort Sumpter, and whom it might be convenient and 
agreeable for you to invite to accompany you here. Your Obt. Servt. 

A. LiisrcoLiNf 

1 ALS, DLC- Anderson Papers. 

2 Cameron to Anderson, April 20, 1861 (OR, I, I, 16). 

To Gustavus V. Fox 1 

Capt. G. V. Fox Washington, D.C. 

My dear Sir May i, 1861 

I sincerely regret that the failure of the late attempt to provision 
Fort-Sumpter, should be the source of any annoyance to you. The 
practicability of your plan was not, in fact, brought to a test. By 
reason of a gale, well known in advance to be possible, and not im- 
probable, the tugs, an essential part of the plan, never reached the 
ground; while, by an accident, for which you were in no wise 
responsible, and possibly I, to some extent was, you were deprived 
of a war vessel with her men, which you deemed of great impor- 
tance to the enterprize. 2 

I most cheerfully and truly declare that the failure of the under- 
taking has not lowered you a particle, while the qualities you 
developed in the effort, have greatly heightened you, in my estima- 

[350] 



MAY 1 , 1 8 6 1 

tlon. For a daring and dangerous enterprize, of a similar character, 
you would, to-day, be the man, of all my acquaintances, whom I 
would select. 

You and I both anticipated that the cause of the country -would 
be advanced by making the attempt to provision Fort-Sumpter, 
even if it should fail; and it is no small consolation now to feel 
that our anticipation is justified by the result. Very truly your 
friend A 



1 ALS, MHi. 

2 The Pou?hatan had been placed under command of David D. Porter on se- 
cret orders (q v., April i, supra^). Fox's report, April 19, 1861, on the failure of 
the Sumter expedition, emphasized the storm of April 12-13 an d the expectation 
of the arrival of the Poushatan, "which was to play a leading role in the attempt 
to relieve the fort. Fox commented with, understandable bitterness, "I learned 
on the i3th instant that the Powhatan was withdrawn from duty off Charleston 
on the 7th instant, yet I was permitted to sail on the Qth, the Pawnee on the 
gth, and the Pocahontas on the loth, without intimation that the main portion 
the fighting portion of our expedition was taken away." (OR, I, I, 11). 

To Isham G. Harris 1 

To His Excellency the Governor Executive Department 

of the State of Tennessee Washington, D.C. 

Nashville Tenn. May [i ?] 1861 

Sir: Yours of the 2Qth. ultimo, calling my attention to the sup- 
posed seizure, near Cairo, Illinois, of the Steamboat C. E. BQllman, 
and claiming that the said boat and it's cargo are the property of 
the State of Tennessee and her citizens; and demanding to know 
whether the seizure was made by the authority of this Government, 
or is approved by it, is duly received. 

In answer I have to say this Government has no official informa- 
tion of such seizure; 2 but assuming that the seizure was made, and 
that the cargo consisted chiefly of munitions of War owned by the 
State of Tennessee, and passing into the control of it's Governor, 
this Government avows the seizure, for the following reasons. 

A legal call was recently made upon the said Governor of Ten- 
nessee to furnish a quota of militia to suppress an insurrection 
against the United States, which call said Governor responded to 
by a refusal, couched in disrespectful and malicious language. 3 
This Government therefore infers that munitions of War passing 
into the hands of said Governor, are intended to be used against 
the United States; and the government will not indulge the weak- 
ness of allowing it, so long as it is in it's power to prevent. This 
Government will not, at present, question, but that the State of Ten- 
nessee, by a majority of it's citizens, is loyal to the Federal Union, 

[351] 



MAY 1, l86l 

and the government holds itself responsible in damages for all 
injuries it may do to any who may prove to be such. 

1 ADf, DLC-RTL,. Governor Harris' letter of April 29 complained that "On 
the a6th inst. the Steamboat C. E. Hillman . . . was seized ... by an armed 
force on the Steamboat Swallow. . . . The boat Hillman was owned by citizens 
of Tennessee and its cargo was the property of this State. ... It becomes my 
. . . duty ... to request that the President shall inform me whether the same 
was done by or under the instructions of the Federal Government, or is ap- 
proved by said Government. . . ." (DLC-RTL). 

2 Governor Richard Yates of Illinois had telegraphed on April 24 to the 
officer in command at Cairo to stop the C. E. Hillman and John D. Perry and 
seize all arms and munitions. The action was taken without orders from 
Washington. 

3 Harris to Cameron, April 17, 1861: "Tennessee will not furnish a single 
man for purpose of coercion, but 50,000, if necessary, for the defense of our 
rights and those of our Southern brethren." (OR, III, I, 81). 

Remarks at a Band Concert 1 

May i, 1861 

Upon the President's making his appearance on the portico of 
the White House, he was greeted -with the most enthusiastic ap- 
plause from the vast throng present; in response to which, the 
President made a few remarks, in which he congratulated them 
upon the prospects of a happy termination of the present difficul- 
ties, but assuring them that the people were more powerful in that 
than he himself was. 

1 Washington National Republican^ May 2, 1861. Lincoln's remarks followed 
the performance by the Seventh New York regimental band. 

Endorsement : 
Simon Cameron to Cassius M. Clay 1 

I cheerfully concur in the foregoing testimonial given by the 
Hon. Secretary of War. A. LINCOLN, 

President of the United States. 
Executive Mansion, May 2, 1861. 

1 Cassius M. Clay, The Life of Cassius Marcellus Clay; Memoirs, Writings, 
and Speeches, . . . (Cincinnati, 1886), p. 269, Cameron extended appreciation 
". . . of the very prompt and patriotic manner in which your Battalion was 
organized for the defense of the capital, . . ." 

Remarks to Rhode Island Marine Battery 1 

May a, 1861 

The magnificent Providence marine corps artillery . . . passed 
in review before President Lincoln, who expressed himself as 

[352] 



MAY 3, l86l 

much pleased with the completeness of the battery, and with the 
patriotism of the noble little State which has come out so nobly in 
defence of the Union. 

1 Washington Daily National Intelligencer, May 3, 1861. 

To William H. Seward 1 

Hon. Sec. of State Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir May 2, 1861 

Our Chicago detective has arrived; and I have promised to have 
you meet him and me here at 8, o'clock this evening. Yours truly 

A. 



1 ALS, NAuE. Allan Pinkerton in a letter from Chicago, April 21, 1861, 
offered his services and sent a cipher code to be used in communicating with 
him. "In the present disturbed state of affairs I dare not trust this to the mails 
so send by one of my force "who was 'with me at Baltimore. . . ." (DLG-R.TL). 
Whether Pinkerton, or his operative Timothy Webster who carried his mes- 
sages, was to meet Seward, is uncertain. 



Proclamation Calling for 42,034 

May 3, 1861 
By the President of the United States 

A Proclamation. 

Whereas existing exigencies demand immediate and adequate 
measures for the protection of the National Constitution and the 
preservation of the National Union by the suppression of the in- 
surrectionary combinations now existing in several States for op- 
posing the laws of the Union and obstructing the execution thereof, 
to which end a military force in addition to that called forth by my 
proclamation of the fifteenth day of April in the present year, ap- 
pears to be indispensably necessary, 

Now, therefore, I, Abraham Lincoln President of the United 
States, and Commander-in-Chief 2 of the Army and Navy thereof, 
and of the Militia of the several States, when called into actual 
service, do hereby call into the service of the United States, forty- 
two thousand and thirty four volunteers, to serve for the period of 
three years, unless sooner discharged, and to be mustered into serv- 
ice as Infantry and cavalry. The proportions of each arm, and the 
details of enrollment and organization will be made known, 
through the Department of War. 

And I also direct that the regular army of the United States be 
increased by the addition of eight regiments of infantry, one regi- 
ment of cavalry, and one regiment of artillery, making altogether 

[353] 



MAY 4, l86l 

a maximum aggregate increase of twenty-two thousand, seven 
hundred and fourteen officers and enlisted men; the details of -which 
increase will also be made known through the Department of War. 
And I further direct the enlistment for not less than one or more 
than three years, of eighteen thousand seamen, in addition to the 
present force, for the naval service of the United States. The details 
of the enlistment and organization will be made known through the 
Department of the Navy. 

The call for volunteers hereby made, and the direction for the 
increase of the regular army, and for the enlistment of seamen 
hereby given, together with the plan of organization adopted for 
the volunteer and for the regular forces hereby authorized, will 
be submitted to Congress as soon as assembled. 

In the meantime I earnestly invoke the cooperation of all good 
citizens in the measures hereby adopted, for the effectual suppres- 
sion of unlawful violence, for the impartial enforcement of con- 
stitutional laws, and for the speediest possible restoration of peace 
and order and, with these, of happiness and prosperity throughout 
our country. * 

In testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand and 
caused the seal of the United States to be affixed. Done at 
[L.S.] the City of Washington this third day of May, in the year 
of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and sixty-one, 
and of the independence of the United States the eighty- 
fifth. ABRAHAM LirrcoLiNr 
By the President: 

WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of State. 

1 DS, DNA FS RG 11, Proclamations; DfS, DLC-RTX. 

2 The draft in the Lincoln Papers shows Lincoln's emendation of the re- 
mainder of this sentence to its final form. The original reading was: ". . . of 
the Army and Navy forces do hereby call into service of the United States . . ." 

Memorandum : 

Appointment of Andrew W. Evans 1 

The appointment within requested ought to be made if prac- 
ticable A. LirccoLisr 

May 4, 1861 

1 AES, IHi. The endorsement appears on the letter dated May 3, 1861, from 
Alexander Evans, ex-congressman (1847-1853) of Elkton, Maryland, asking 
that his "brother, Lieutenant Andrew W. Evans, stationed at Fort Buchanan, 
New Mexico, be promoted to a colonelcy in one of the new regular regiments. 
Andrew "W". Evans was promoted to captain May 14, 1861, becoming colonel 
of the First Maryland Volunteers, April 15, 1864. 

[354] 



To Charles S. Olden 1 

His Excellency Charles S. Olden Washington D.C. 

Govr. of the State of New- Jersey May 4, 1861 

My dear Sir: Yours of the sgth. ult. covering copy of a letter of E. 
R. V. Wright Major General of 2nd. Div. N.J.S. Militia, tendering 
the services of said Division to the United States, to continue as 
long as the President may require such services" has been duly 
received. 

I lose no time in tendering you, and through you, General Wright 
and all the officers and men of his Division^ my sincere and hearty 
thanks for the part each takes in this patriotic effort, 

I shall send the papers immediately to the War Department with 
the recommendation that Gen. Wright's Division be at once re- 
ceived into the new corp's of Volunteers, for which a call, by Proc- 
lamation appears to-day. Your Obt. Servt. A. Liisrcoi^sr 

1 ALS-P, ISLA. See Inn coin's endorsement, infra. 

Endorsement: Charles S. Olden to Lincoln 1 

I recommend that the Division named within be admitted into 
the new Corps of Volunteers just called for. A. LINCOUNT* 

May 4, 1861. 

1 Stan. V. Henkels Catalog 1379, October 15, 1925, No. 31. Governor Olden's 
letter of April 29, 1861, enclosed a communication from Major General Ed- 
win R. V. Wright, ". . . the object of which is to inform you through me that 
the officers of the division have unanimously resolved to tender to you the serv- 
ices of the said division." (OR, III, I, 130). 

To Winfield Scott 1 

CoL Lander is a valuable man to us. Will Genl. Scott see him a 
few minutes, and consider the feasability of his plan? 

May 4, 1861. A, LmcoLisr 

1 AES, IHi. Lincoln's endorsement is on the back of Se ward's letter of May 
2, 1861, recommending Colonel Frederick W. Lander's project of raising a 
regiment of Virginia volunteers. Lander was appointed brigadier general of 
volunteers, May 17, 1861. 

To William H. Seward 1 

Hon. Sec. of State Executive Mansion 

Dear Sir May 4. 1861 

The Maryland Committee men, or Commissioners, are to be 
here at ten o'clock this morning. Yours truly A. LIISTCOXJNT 

NAuE. 

[355] 



Reply to Committee from Maryland Legislature 1 

May 4, 1861 

The President replied that their suggestions and representations 
should be duly considered; but that he should now say no more 
than [that] the public interest and not any spirit of revenge should 
actuate his measures. 

* Washington Daily National Intelligencer, May 7, 1861. The committee had 
"... expressed their belief that no immediate effort at secession or resistance 
. . . would be attempted . . . and asked that . . . the State ... be spared the 
evils of a Tn.ilj.tary occupation or a revengeful chastisement for former trans- 
gressions." See Lincoln to Otho Scott, Robert M. McLane, and William J. Ross, 
May 6, infra. 

To Gideon Welles 1 

My dear Sir. May 4, 1861 

I understand there is a vacancy in the Staff of Marine Corps,, Ad- 
jutant and Inspector, and that Lieut. Nicholson of the Marine 
Corps, is well recommended for the place, by GenL Scott, among 
others. If all this be true, let him be appointed. Yours truly 

A. 



1 Stan. V. Henkels Catalog 1342, January 4, 1924, No, 13. Augustus S. Nichol- 
son -was appointed adjutant and inspector of the Marine Corps with rank of 
major, May 6, 1861. 

To Joseph H. Barrett 1 

Hon. Com. of Pensions Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir May 6, 1861 

I understand there is a clerkship vacant by the resignation of a 
Mr. Woodley. 2 If so, I will be personally obliged if you will give 
it to the bearer of this Albert I. Brooks, 3 formerly of 111. now of 
Ky. I am an .... on this; and if Mr. Smith 4 has to make the ap- 
pointment, procure him to make it for me Yours truly 

A. 



1 Copy, ISLA. The copy is obviously inaccurate, but efforts to procure a 
photostat have failed. 2 W. H. Woodley of Virginia. 

3 Albert I. Brooks formerly of Petersburg, Illinois, received the appointment. 

4 The pension office was under Caleb B. Smith, secretary of Interior. 

To Salmon E Chase 1 

Executive Mansion, May 6, 1861. 

My dear Sir: Mr. French S. Evans, the bearer of this, thinks 
there is an appraisership still vacant at Baltimore, and if so, I very 
sincerely wish you would give it to him. I have been greatly I 

[356] 



MAY 6, l86l 

may say grievously disappointed and disobliged by Mr. Cork- 
ran's 2 refusal to make Mr. Evans deputy naval officer, as I re- 
quested him to do. 

A point must be strained to give Mr. Evans a situation. Yours 
very truly, A. LINCOLN. 

1 NH, VI, 266. On April 13, Chase liad recommended French S. Evans, for- 
merly editor of the Baltimore Patriot, who had been driven out of Baltimore 
"because of his Union sympathy (DLC-RTL). Evans is listed as deputy naval 
officer at Baltimore as of September 30, 1861. 

2 Francis S. Corkran, appointed naval officer at Baltimore, April 15, 1861. See 
Lincoln to Corkran, infra. 

To Salmon E Chase 1 

Hon. Sec. of Treasury 2 Executive Department 

Dear Sir May 6, 1861 

The Secretary of State this moment introduces to me Mr. James 
Gordon Bennett, Jr. who tenders to the U.S. service, a fine Yacht 
of 160 tons burthen. If you allow him an interview, "which I ask 
for him, he will talk with you about putting some other vessels of 
the same class, into the service. We send this subject to you be- 
cause we believe these vessels may be made most available in the 
Revenue service. Yours truly, A. LiisrcoLisr 

* ALS, DNA FI RG 26, General Records, U.S. Coast Guard. The son of the 
editor of the New York Herald was commissioned third lieutenant in the revenue 
cutter service, May 15, 1861, and resigned his commission when his yacht 
Henrietta was taken out of the service after a year. 

2 "Navy" as first written, and "Treasury" substituted by Lincoln. 

To Francis S. Corkran 1 

Hon. F. S. Corkran Washington D.C. 

My dear Sir May 6, 1861 

I am quite sure you are not aware how much I am disobliged by 
the refusal to give Mr. F. S. Evans a place in the Custom-House. I 
had no thought that the men to whom I had given the higher of- 
ficers [sic] would be so ready to disoblige me. I still wish you 
would give Mr. Evans the place of Deputy Naval Officer. Yours &c. 

A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, IHi. See "Lincoln to Chase, supra. 

To Hannibal Hamlin 1 

Hon. H. Hamlin Washington, D.C. May 6, 1861 

My dear Sir Please advise me at the close of each day what 
troops left during the day, where going, and by what route; what 

[357] 



MAY 6, l86l 

remaining at N.Y, and -what expected in the next day. Give the 
numbers, as near as convenient, and what corps they are. This in- 
formation, reaching us daily, will be very useful, as well as satis- 
factory. [Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.] 

1 ALS, CSmH. The letter bears Hamlin's endorsement, April, 1889, that he 
had cut off the close and signature. Hamlin to Lincoln, Hampden, Maine, May 
11, 1861, explained that he had remained in New York two weeks without 
hearing from Lincoln. "I left there and reached home last eve, where I reed 
your note of the 6th. ... I will at once repair to N.Y. or to any place . . . 
and perform as well as I can that or any other service you may require. . . ." 
(DLC-RTL). 



To Otho Scott, Robert M. McLane, 
and William J. Ross 1 

Messrs. Otho Scott R. M. McLane & Washington B.C. 

Win. J. Ross. Commissioners of the Legislature May 6, 1861. 
of the State of Maryland. 

Gentlemen On presenting me the resolution of the Legislature 
of your State, and addressing me verbally, two days ago, you had 
the kindness to say you did not expect an immediate answer. Ap- 
preciating what you said orally, I, however, attempt no answer ex- 
cept to what is written in the resolution. 

The resolution is as follows (Here insert it) 2 

To the question "in regard to the present and any proposed pro- 
spective Military use or occupation of the soil and property of the 
State, by the General Government &c" the answer must necessarily 
be contingent. 

1 ADf, DLC-B.TL. The letter was apparently never completed. See the re- 
port of Lincoln's oral reply, May 4, supra. 

2 The resolution in the Lincoln Papers reads in part as follows: ". . . to com- 
municate immediately, in person, with the President of the United States in 
regard to the present and any proposed prospective Military use or occupation 
of the soil and property of the State by the General Government; and they are 
directed to ascertain and report to the General assembly . . . whether any be- 
coming arrangements with the General Government are practicable in that 
connexion, for the maintenance of the peace and honor of the State, and the 
security of its inhabitants." 



To William EL Seward 1 

Hon. Sec. of State Executive Mansion May 6. 1861 

My dear Sir Gen. Cameron is anxious that E. Joy Morris shall 
be Minister to Constantinople; and if Gen. Webb has definitely de- 
clined it, why might not Mr Morris be appointed? Pennsylvania 

[358] 



MAY 7, l86l 

is well entitled to the place, and Gen. C. thinks there Is political 
reason for the appointment being made at once. Your Obt. Servt. 

A. 



1 ALS, NAuE. Representative Edward Joy Morris of Philadelphia was 
appointed minister to Turke3 r , June 8, 1861. James \V. Webb of New York be- 
came minister to Brazil. 



Order to Robert Anderson 1 

May 7, 1861 
To all who shall see these presents greeting: 

Know Ye, That reposing special trust and confidence in the pa- 
triotism, valor., fidelity, and abilities of Colonel ROBERT AZSTDERSO:?*., 
U.S. Army, I have empowered him and do hereby empower him 
to receive into the Service of the United States, as many regiments 
of volunteer troops from the State of Kentucky and from the West- 
ern part of the State of Virginia, as shall be willing to engage in 
the service of the United States for the period of three years, upon 
the terms and according to the plan proposed by the Proclamation 
of May 3, 1861, and General Order, No. 15, from the War Depart- 
ment of May 4, 1861. 

The troops whom he may receive shall be on the same footing in 
every respect as those of the like kind called for in the proclama- 
tion above cited, except that the officers thereof shall be commis- 
sioned by the United States. 

He is, therefore, carefully and diligently to discharge the duty 
hereby devolved upon him by doing and performing all manner of 
things thereunto belonging. 

Given under my hand at the City of Washington, this seventh 
day of May, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred 
and sixty-one, and in the eighty-fifth year of the Independence of 
the United States. ABRAHAM: Liisrcou* 

By the President, 

SIMON CAivcEROisr Secretary of "War. 

1 DS, DLC- Anderson Papers. Major Robert Anderson was promoted to "briga- 
dier general, June 17, 1861. His designation as colonel in this order may refer 
to His brevet rank. 

To Salmon E Chase 1 

Hon. Secretary of Treasury. Executive Mansion, May 7, 1861. 

My dear Sir; You may remember that John S. Gallaher, a 
worthy Virginia gentleman, has been and is an applicant for an 

[359] 



MAY 7, l86l 

Auditorship in your Department. He now writes a friend here that 
he understands that the place of 5th Auditor has been made vacant 
by the resignation of a North Carolinian. If this is true, might not 
Mr. Gallaher have the place? Yours truly, A. 



1 Tracy, p. 182. John C. Underwood of Virginia received the appointment. John 
S. Gallaher is not of record as a federal employee until the U.S. Official Reg- 
ister lists him as a clerk in the quartermaster general's office, September 30, 
1863. 

To the Regent Captains 
of the Republic of San Marino 1 

May 7, 1861 
Abraham Lincoln, 
President of the United States of America. 

To the Regent Captains of the Republic of San Marino 
Great and Good Friends 

I have received and read with great sensibility the letter which 
as Regent Captains of the Republic of San Marino you addressed to 
me on the 2Qth of March last. I thank the Council of San Marino 
for the honor of citizenship they have conferred upon me. 

Although your dominion is small, your State is nevertheless one 
of the most honored, in all history. It has by its experience 
demonstrated the truth, so full of encouragement to the friends 
of Humanity, that Government founded on Republican prin- 
ciples is capable of being so administered as to be secure and 
enduring. 

You have kindly adverted to the trial through which this Re- 
public is now passing. It is one of deep import. It involves the 
question whether a Representative republic, extended and aggran- 
dized so much as to be safe against foreign enemies can save 
itself from, the dangers of domestic faction. I have faith in a good 
result. 

Wishing that your interesting State may endure and flourish 
forever, and that you may live long and enjoy the confidence and 
secure the gratitude of your fellow citizens, I pray God to have 
you in his holy keeping. Your Good Friend 

Washington, May 7 1861 ABRAHAM: LINCOLN 

By the President 

WIIJLIAM H. SEWARB Secretary of State 

1 L.S-P, ISLA; copy, DNA FS RG 59, Communications to Foreign Sovereigns 
and States, III, 173. The original is presumably still in the archives of San 
Marino. 

[360] 



To Gideon Welles 1 

Hon. Sec. of Navy Executive Mansion 

Dear Sir May 7, 86 

Lieut. McLaughlin, of the Navy calls upon me saying he ten- 
dered you his resignation, which has not yet been accepted, and 
which he now wishes to withdraw, and that you refer him to me. 
I can not take the lead in the case. You know the circumstances, 
which I do not; and if you think fit to allow him to withdraw the 
resignation, I make no objection; but I can not take the lead. Yours 
truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, The Rosenbach Company, Philadelphia and New York. Augustus 
McLaughlin, a native of Maryland and appointed from Arkansas, was not per- 
mitted to withdraw his resignation. The Naval Records have him at a later date 
in the Confederate Navy. 



To Joseph H. Barrett 1 

Executive Mansion 
Hon. Coror. of Pensions, May- 8. 86 1 

My dear Sir Once more I ask you to find a clerkship for a man 
of your own name O. D. Barret, of Oswego Co New- York. 
Yours truly A. LIT^TCOLK 

1 AJLS-F, Munsey's Magazine , March, 1895, XII, 591. Oliver D. Barrett is 
listed as clerk in the Pension office as of September 30, 1861. 

To Salmon E Chase 1 

Executive Mansion, May 8, 1861. 

My dear Sir: I am told there is an office in your department 
called "The Superintending Architect of the Treasury Department, 
connected with the Bureau of Construction," which is now held 
by a man of the name of Young, 2 and wanted by a gentleman of 
the name of Christopher Adams. 

Ought Mr. Young to be removed, and if yea, ought Mr. Adams 
to be appointed? Mr. Adams is magnificently recommended; but 
the great point in his favor is that Thurlow Weed and Horace Gree- 
ley join in recommending him. I suppose the like never happened 
before, and never will again; so that it is now or never. What say 
you? Yours truly, A. LINCOLN. 

1 NH, VI, 268-69. Lincoln's endorsement on envelope reads "Christopher 
Adams, of/N.Y. for/Bureau of Construction." A scrap of envelope endorsed, 
not in Lincoln's hand, "Christopher Adams./Architect & Builder/ of New York. 
Bureau of Construction** and "bearing on the verso, Lincoln's endorsement "Rec- 

[361] 



MAY 8, l86l 

ommended by both/Weed & Greely" is in the Lincoln Papers, but the let- 
ters of Greeley and Weed are not. 

2 A-m-mi B. Young, supervising architect, still held the office as of September 
30, 1861. 

To James W. Ripley 1 

Col. Ripley: Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: May 8, 1861 

Hon. Mr, Colfax impresses me with the necessity of very early 
attention to placing arms, artillery &c, along the Ohio River, par- 
ticularly on the borders of Indiana and Illinois. Of course you un- 
derstand this subject better than I; and therefore this is to be taken 
as a general suggestion, and, in no sense as dictation. Yours truly 

A. 



1 ALS, IHi. Colonel James "W. Ripley was chief of ordnance, U.S. Army, pro- 
moted to brigadier general by brevet, July 2, 1861. 



To William H. Seward 1 

I understand the consulship named within has fees only, & if so, 
I think the appointment might be made. A. LINCOLN 

May 8, 1861, 

1 AES, DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 329. The endorsement is written 
on the back of Roderick "W. Cameron to Lincoln, May 8, 1861, endorsed also by 
Winfield Scott, asking the consulship at Sydney, Australia, for Edward Leaven- 
worth, secretary of Columbia College, New York City. Roderick "W. Cameron 
was a Canadian merchant at New York, operating a line of ships to Australia. 



To William B. Thomas 1 

Hon. W. B. Thomas. Washington, B.C. 

Collector May 8. 1861 

My dear Sir I do not demand., or insist., even, that you shall 
make any appointment in your office; but I would be much obliged 
if you could give a place to [blank] Ridgeway, 2 or to such person 
as a widow sister of his a Mrs. Corneau 3 would name. It is for 
her sake I make this request, she being an acquaintance and very 
highly valued friend of mine. Yours very truly A. Lirreousr 

1 ALS, PHi. William B. Thomas, was collector of the customs office at Phila- 
delphia. 

2 Charles S. Bidgeway was clerk in the custom house at Philadelphia as of 
September 30, 1861. 

3 Mrs. Charles S. Corneau (Elizabeth Bidgeway), of Springfield, Illinois. 

[362] 



To Gideon Welles 1 

Hon. Gideon Welles. Executive Mansion, 

My dear Sir May 8, 1861. 

I understand that there is some opposition to the appointment of 
Capt. G. V. Fox to the clerkship we talked of. My wish, and advice 
is, that you do not allow any ordinary obstacle prevent his appoint- 
ment. He is a live man, w r hose services we cannot well dispense 
with. Yours very truly A. LiisrcoiJNr. 

1 Hertz, II, 834. Gustavus V. Fox was appointed chief clerk of the Navy De- 
partment, May 8, 1861, and became assistant secretary of the Navy by a bill 
introduced in the Senate creating the office, July 16. 

To Gideon Welles 1 

May 8, 1861. 

Please send up papers (Commission I believe) for Samuel Bell as 
Navy Agent, at San Francisco. Yours truly A. LusrcoLisr. 

1 Stan. V. Henkels Catalog 1342, January 4, 1924, No. 9. See Lincoln to 
Welles, April 15, supra, concerning Bell's appointment. Bell's appointment was 
not made. 

To Salmon P. Chase 1 

Executive Mansion, May 9, 1861. 

My dear Sir: Mr. James N. Muller wishes to be supervising in- 
spector of steamboats for the district of Baltimore. I am somewhat 
interested for him, and as the place is in your department, if you 
will look into the question of his qualification for the place, and 
shall be satisfied with him, I will appoint him, no matter how 
soon. Yours truly, A. LINCOLN. 

1 NH, VI, 269. Chase replied May 9, "The inquiries necessary to ascertain 
the fitness of Mr. Muller . . . shall be immediately made." (DLC-BTL,). See 
Lincoln to Chase, May 31, infra. Muller received the appointment, was con- 
firmed by the Senate, reconsidered, and then rejected on August 6, 1861. Nom- 
inated again January 16, 1862, he "was confirmed March 19, 1862. 

To Salmon P. Chase 1 

Executive Mansion, May 10, 1861. 

My dear Sir: I have felt myself obliged to refuse the post-office 
at this place to my old friend Nathan Sargent, which wounds him, 
and consequently me, very deeply. He now says there is an office 
in your department, called the "Commissioner of Customs/' which 

[363] 



MAY 1 O, l86l 

the incumbent, a Mr. Ingham, wishes to vacate. I will be much 
obliged if you agree for me to appoint Mr. Sargent to this place. 
Yours very truly, A. LirsrcoLisr. 

1 NH, VI, 269. Sargent received the place of commissioner of customs va- 
cated "by Samuel Ingham of Connecticut. 

Endorsement: Mark W. Delahay to Lincoln 1 

[May 10, 1861] 
Come at 8. Saturday evening. LINCOLN 

3-AES, The Rosenbach Company, Philadelphia and New York. "Written on 
the back of a note from Delahay, May o, 1861, requesting an interview on 
matters "of great importance to our People and myself." 

To Thomas H. Hicks 1 

His Excellency Washington, D.C. 

T. H. Hicks May 10. 1861 

My dear Sir Yours of the 8th. is received, and shall have the 
best attention I can bestow upon it. Yours very truly 

A. LusrcouN* 

1 ALS, IHi. Governor Hicks* letter of May 8, 1861, asked federal interven- 
tion in the seizure of the customs house at Oxford, Maryland, and of canal boats 
with produce for Georgetown and Maryland (DLG-Nicolay Papers). Appar- 
ently there was another letter from Hicks on May 10, which Lincoln endorsed 
and sent to the Treasury Department. Although the Register of Miscellaneous 
Letters, Vol. 32, P6 (DNA RG 56), lists the letter from Hicks, May 10, endorsed 
by Lincoln, the letter is missing from the file. 

Proclamation 
Suspending Writ of Habeas Corpus in Florida 1 

May 10, 1861 
By the President of the United States of America. 

A Proclamation. 

Whereas, an insurrection exists in the State of Florida, by which 
the lives, liberty and property of loyal citizens of the United States 
are endangered: 

And whereas it is deemed proper that all needful measures 
should be taken for the protection of such citizens, and all officers 
of the United States in the discharge of their public duties, in the 
State aforesaid: 

Now therefore be it known that I, Abraham Lincoln, President 
of the United States, do hereby direct the Commander of the Forces 
of the United States on the Florida coast, to permit no person to 

[364] 



MAY 10, l86l 

exercise any office or authority upon the Islands of Key West, the 
Tortugas and Santa Rosa, which may be inconsistent with the laws 
& constitution of the United States, authorizing him at the same 
time, if he shall find it necessary, to suspend there the writ of Ha- 
beas Corpus and to remove from the vicinity of the United States 
fortresses all dangerous or suspected persons. 

In witness -whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, and caused 
the seal of the United States to be affixed, 

Done at the City of Washington, this tenth day of May 

in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and 

[L.S.] sixty-one, and of the Independence of the United States 

the eighty-fifth. ABRAHAM LiisrcoLisr 

By the President: 

WILLIAM: EL SEWARD, Secretary of State. 
1 DS, DNA FS RG 11, Proclamations. 

To William Sprague 1 

Executive Mansion May 10. 1861 
His Excellency Gov. Wm. Sprague 

My dear Sir: I think I had a letter from you some time ago 
naming a person whom you would like to have appointed PJYL at 
Providence, R.I. and day-before yesterday, a gentleman urged the 
name of Thomas A. Doyle, as being the man whom you would like 
to have appointed. I write this now to assure you that while your 
wishes in this respect, are entitled to, and have received the highest 
consideration, there is a difficulty, such as I have not surmounted in 
any other case. It is that a different man Walter C. Simmons 2 
is recommended by both the Senators, and both the old Representa- 
tives of the State, and also by one of the new Representatives. 

In these cases the Executive is obliged to be greatly dependent 
upon members of Congress; and while, under peculiar circum- 
stances, a single member or two, may be occasionally over-ruled, I 
believe as strong a combination as the present never has been. 

I therefore beg you to be assured that if I follow the rule in this 
case, as it appears to me I must, it will be -with pain and not with 
pleasure, that you are not obliged. 



f, DLC-RTL. Governor Sprague of Rhode Island was in Washington 
on May o and answered the same day that his letter recommending Thomas A. 
Doyle, who later married Sprague's sister, ". . . was written long before the 
present crisis. I have refused since then, to interfere with any appointments 
.... I beg you to feel no unpleasantness for the course which your duty com- 
pells you to take. . . ." (DLC-RTL). 

2 Walter C. Simmons was the son of Senator James F. Simmons. 

[365] 



To Lorenzo Thomas 1 

Adjutant General Executive Mansion 

My Dear Sir: May 10, 1861 

Mr. O. Pullizi, 2 as I understand, was once in the regular Army, 
and resigned under some charges, of which you probably know 
more than I do. He now wishes to re-enter the Army; and if it vio- 
lates no rule of law or propriety I shall be glad for him to be 
obliged in that respect. Yours truly, A. 



1 Copy, CSmH. Lorenzo Thomas was promoted to adjutant general March 7, 
1861. 

2 The source is probably in error as to the initial. The only Pullizi of record 
in the Army Registers is Venerando Pulizzi, who was reinstated with rank of 
first lieutenant, May 14, 1861, and resigned again September 9, 1861. 

To Edward Bates 1 

Hon. Attorney General Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir May 11, 1861 

Please send me a commission for Phineas W. Hitchcock, as 
Marshal of Nebraska. Yours very truly A. LIISTCOLIST 

!ALS, DNA GE RG 60, Papers of Attorney General, Segregated Lincoln 
Material. 

To Gideon Welles 1 

Hon. Gideon Welles. Executive Mansion, 

My dear Sir May 11, 1861. 

Some time ago, at the request of Commander E. B. Boutwell, I 
asked you to look into the case of his suspension, and ascertain 
whether he might not, without inconsistency, be relieved from the 
remainder of his suspension. I am now informed that his case is not 
yet acted upon. I make no complaint of this, knowing you are over- 
whelmed with business; but I will be obliged if you will attend to 
it as soon as possible. Yours very truly A. LINCOLN. 

1 Hertz, II, 834. In June, 1858, Edward B. Boutwell of Virginia had been 
found guilty of disobedience to lawful orders, neglect of duty, and scandalous 
conduct. The court sentenced him to be dismissed, but the sentence "was com- 
muted to "five years Furlough Pay." Welles replied, May 16, 1861, "... I 
am not in possession of any fact which calls upon me to advise a further miti- 
gation. . . .** (DLC-RTL). Boutwell was dismissed from the service, July 31, 
1861. 

To Gideon Welles 1 

Executive Mansion, May 11, 1861. 

Sir: Lieutenant D. D. Porter was placed in command of the 
steamer Powhatan and Captain Samuel Mercer was detached there- 

[366] 



MAY 1 3, l86l 

from by my special order, and neither of them is responsible for 
any apparent or real irregularity on their part or in connection 
with that vessel. 

Hereafter Captain Porter is relieved from that special service 
and placed under the direction of the Navy Department, from 
which he will receive instructions and to which he will report. Very 
respectfully, ABRAHAM LINCOLN. 

The Secretary of the Navy. 

1 Naval Records., Series I, IV, 128. 

To Hiram Barney 1 

Hon. Hiram Barney Washington, D.C. 

My dear Sir May 13. 1861 

Two or three days ago I wrote in behalf of Mr. William Ward, 
of your City, inclosing Mr. Greeley's letter introducing him to me. 
Since then I have been more deeply interested for Mr. Ward, by 
conversations with him, and with others who know him, and his 
history. If you can do something for him I shall be obliged. Yours 
very truly A LINCOLN 

iALS, owned by Mrs. Joseph Brady, Pasadena, California. Lincoln's letter 
to Barney of May 9 is presumably not extant. Barney's letter of May 11, ac- 
knowledged its receipt "... enclosing Mr. Greeley's letter on behalf of Mr. 
William Ward of this city. I understand you to desire Mr. Ward's application 
considered on its merits. . . ." (DLC-RTL). William Ward is not listed in the 
New York customs house as of September 30, 1861. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion, May 13, 1861 

Dear Sir You see on the other side of this sheet that four ger- 
man Regiments already raised in New- York, wish to form a Bri- 
gade, and have Carl Schurz for their Brigadier General. Why 
should it not be done at once? By the Plan of organization, I see 
I am to appoint the generals. 

Schurz says he would, if allowed, go immediately to Fortress 
Monroe; and if it would be an objection that, by rank, he would 
command the garrison there, he would, of choice, waive that, 

I am for it, unless there be some valid reason against it. Answer 
soon. Yours truly A. LINCOLN. 

1 ALS copy, DLC-RTL. On the bottom of the sheet is a note not in Lincoln's 
hand: "C.S. will be at 445 North 5th Str Philadelphia on Monday 13th. and 
at the Prescott-house corner ol Spring Str. & Broadway, New-York on Tuesday 

[367] 



MAY 13, l86l 

14th. and Wednesday i^th." See Lincoln to Schurz, infra. Lincoln's letter is writ- 
ten on the back of a "Duplicate" copy of a petition to Governor Morgan signed 
by field officers of the Seventh and Eighth Regiments, United Turner Rifles, and 
DeKalb Regiment, requesting him to unite the four regiments into one brigade 
and to tender its command to Carl Schurz. 

To Carl Schurz 1 

[May 13, 1861 ?] 

Get the german Brigade in shape, and, at their request, you shall 
be Brigadier General. "Will write you at New- York. 

A. 



3-ADfS, DLC-RTL. A line has been drawn through the signature. This is 
probably the draft of a telegram intended for Carl Schurz at Philadelphia. See 
Lincoln to Cameron and note, supra. See also Lincoln to Schurz, May 16, infra. 

To Whom It May Concern 1 

To Whom it May Concern May 13, 1861 

James A. Sheehan, 3rd Sergeant of the Washington Light In- 
fantry Batallion, inquires whether the U.S. will accept a regiment 
of loyal Baltimoreans, if he will raise and teach one, [to w]hich 
I answer, I suppose [such] a Regiment would be accepted; but to 
avoid confusion, the approval of the Secretary of War must first be 
had. 

1 American Art Association Catalog, December 3, 1923, No. 541. Brackets are 
in the source. There is no record of a commission for James A. Sheehan. 

To Robert Anderson 1 

Col. Robert Anderson Washington, D.C. 

My dear Sir May 14. 1861 

Some time ago, and before it was arranged for you to go West, as 
now, the question was upon us how arms sent to Cincinnati for 
Kentuckians, could surely be put in the hands of friends, and not 
of enemies; and, for this purpose, and without their knowledge, 
Messrs Crittenden, Guthrie, and Joshua F. Speed, bearer of this, 
or any one of them, were designated to distribute the arms, in their 
discretion. After you left here last week it occurred to us that you 
could perform this service as safely, and perhaps more expeditious- 
ly, by reason that you wall be on the spot, and will not have to 
wait for the co-operation of any one; and a direction was accord- 
ingly sent to the parties f orwarding the arms to Cincinnati. It now 
occurs further that the kind assistance of these gentlemen may still 

[368] 



MAY 4, l86l 

be valuable to you in this, and perhaps other matters; and -when it 
shall so appear to you it is hoped you "will avail yourself of it, Mr. 
Speed, though less kno\vn to the world than the other gentlemen, 
is far better known to me than either of them; and I have the ut- 
most confidence in his loyalty and integrity, and also in his judg- 
ment on any subject which he professes to understand. I think you 
will find him a most agreeable companion, and at the same time 
a most valuable assistant in our common cause. Yours very truly 

A. 



1 ALS, NWM. On the back of the letter appears the following Hst of names, 
probably representing the men recommended to Anderson by Speed for super- 
vision of the distribution of arms at the designated places: James Harlan, Frank- 
fort; James Speed, Louisville; Garrett Davis, Paris; Samuel Lusk, Lancaster; 
John H. Ward, Bowling Green; Thornton F. Marshall, Augusta; James H. 
["Lord?], Frankfort; Charles A. Wickliffe, Bowling Green. On May 19, Ander- 
son acknowledged receipt of Lincoln's letter ". . . introducing Mr. Joshua F. 
Speed and giving me instructions about issuing arms to our friends in Ely. I 
will carefully attend to the performance of that duty. . . . Mr. Speed and 
other gentlemen . . . advise that I should not, at present, have any thing to 
do with the raising of troops in Ky. . . . Many of our friends think that it would 
be advisable for me to take command of New Port Barracks. . . ." (DLG-R.TL) . 
On May 28, the Department of Kentucky was constituted, with Anderson in 
command. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir May 14. 1861 

After you left here to-day, Mr. Blair came in; and, being told 
what we had been doing in relation to generals and colonels, he 
seemed to be dissatisfied. Would it not be better for you to see Mr. 
Blair, and ascertain what is the trouble with him? We should take 
some pains to avoid dissatisfaction among ourselves. Yours very 
truly A. Lrrccousr 

1 ALS, DLC-Gameron Papers. Although the circumstances of mobilization 
were so complex, not to say chaotic, that any succinct statement of the conflict 
between the War Department and other branches of the government is open 
to criticism, the basic difficulty seems to have been that the Army wished to 
keep, logically enough, some semblance of an orderly promotion of regular 
officers and integration of troops, while Montgomery Blair, as well as the gov- 
ernors of the loyal states and numerous individual politicians were demanding 
wholesale acceptance of volunteer regiments and elected officers. Cameron re- 
peatedly refused to accept volunteer regiments, and there was much opposition 
to the appointment of "political" generals. Also, in the border states, the con- 
flict between the War Department's view of military rule and the political insist- 
ence upon subordination of the military to loyal local political exigencies 
brought about near chaos in such trouble spots as St. Louis. For further com- 
ment on Blair's opposition to the War Department policy see Lincoln to Cam- 
eron, May 16, in.fr a y and note. 

[369] 



Memorandum : 

Appointments of Major Generals 1 

[c. May 14, 1861] 

McClellan 1 M Gen erals in the Regular Army. 

Mansfield 2 J J 

Butler Major General in the 3 year corps. 

1 AD, IHi. 

2 Mansfield's name is crossed out. George B. McClellan's appointment as ma- 
jor general and Joseph EL. F. Mansfield's appointment as brigadier general, May 
14, were sent to the Senate on July 13, along with many other promotions and 
appointments in the U.S. Army. Benjamin F. Butler's appointment as major 
general of volunteers, May i6 7 went to the Senate, July 29. 

To Gideon Welles 1 

Hon. Sec. of Navy Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: May 14. 1861 

I know but little about ships; but I feel a good deal of interest for 
George W, Lawrence, of Maine, who is a proficient in that line. I 
believe it is settled that the Govt. has large use for all barches [szc] 
of Maine; and I shall be glad if Mr. Lawrence can be engaged in 
it on fair terms to himself and to us. Yours very truly 

A. 



1 ALS, IHi, George W. Lawrence, of Warren, Maine, had been a delegate to 
the Chicago convention in 1860. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War. Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir May 16. 1861 

If possible, take the six Regiments now offered by Massachusetts. 
By their peculiar talent for taking care of themselves, they will 
give us less trouble in supplying them, than will most other troops. 
At all events give these gentlemen a hearing Yours truly 

A. 



1 ALS, IHi. On the bottom of the page is written, "Not agreed to for the 
present. Simon Cameron." The Massachusetts First, Second, Seventh, Ninth, 
Tenth, and Eleventh Regiments were later accepted. On May 6, Governor John 
A. Andrew had written Montgomery Blair "... I pray you claim and secure 
to us ... the right to furnish six regiments ... to march with the advanc- 
ing column over the streets where our brothers poured out their blood. . . ." 
(William Schouler, A History of Massachusetts in the Civil War, I, 166). Blair 
to Lincoln, May 16, reads in. part as follows. "The error in Meig's programme is 
common to the whole army and this is the reason why I have been so persistent 

[370] 



1X1AY 1 6, l86l 

in seeking an outsider for a leader. The military look upon the contest as one 
between the whole people of the South and the people of the North. This is a 
fundamental and fatal error. . . . Nor do I think there is any disrespect to 
Genl. Scott involved in the President's adopting his own policy instead of Scott's 
in the management of the war. . . ." (DLC-RTL,). See also Lincoln to Cam- 
eron, May 14, 1861, supra. 

To Salmon R Chase 1 

Executive Mansion, May 16, 1861. 

My dear Sir: I have not at all considered the qualifications of 
applicants for appraiserships at New York. Mr. David Webb seems 
to understand that he has no opposition for one of the places. 2 If 
this is so, or, in any event, if you wish to appoint him, send me the 
commission. 

Also send me a commission for Mr, George Dennison 3 as naval 
officer. This last I shall have to do, and I may as well do it at once. 
Yours truly, A. 



1 NH, VI, 273. 2 David Webb was not appointed. 

3 Chase replied May 16, "Agreeably to your direction I send a Commission 
for Mr. Dennison; but I shall not fulfill my duty to you if I do not say that I 
fear, if you make this appointment, you will regret it. 

"When it was first proposed . * * I felt that setting aside so many prominent 
men for a gentleman so little known . . . was of questionable expediency. . . . 
many of the most eminent and influential gentlemen of New York have ex- 
pressed . . . such unfavorable opinions of Mr. Dn . . . that were the responsi- 
bility of decision mine, I should not put my name to the commission. ... If 
Mr. Dn. is unjustly censured and your kindness prompts you to place him . . . 
is there not some other, less conspicuous, in which he may receive equal bene- 
fits & have the opportunity of proving himself now undervalued?" (DLC-RTL). 
See Lincoln to Chase, May 18, infra, for further developments in this case. 

To Carl Schixrz 1 

Hon. Carl Schurz Washington, D.C. 

My dear Sir: May 16. 1861 

I have delayed so long to either Telegraph or write you, hoping 
to get the matter of which we spoke, into a satisfactory shape; but 
at last I have not succeeded. On Monday I was about to Telegraph 
you to proceed, but was arrested in it on the question of rank that 
it would put you in command at Fortress Monroe. 

Yesterday the New- York Committee were here; and their mis- 
sion ended in their getting an order to move forward, from N.Y. 
city fourteen Regiments said to be there now five to this city, and 
nine to Fortress Monroe. It did not occur to me till after I parted 
with the Committee, that probably your four german Regiments 
are included in this same fourteen. If so, they will either come here, 

[371] 



MAY I/, l86l 

or go to Fortress Monroe at once. I still hope you may be made 

Brig. Gen. of them; but I can not make it move smoothly just yet. 

Write, or Telegraph me when you receive this. Yours as ever 

A. 



DLC-Schurz Papers. Schurz replied May 19, "I have just received 
your kind letter of the i6th instant. . . . The brigade is formed by the State 
board and consists of the 7th, 8th and aoth, all German regiments, and Ells- 
worth's Zouaves. The field-officers of the three German regiments have re- 
solved to vote for me . . . and have addressed a letter to Colonel Ellsworth, 
informing him of their desire. . . . As far as Fortress Monroe is concerned, the 
difficulty about the rank seems to be removed by General Butler's promotion 
. . . ." (DLC-Nicolay Papers). Butler was promoted to major general of vol- 
unteers, May 16, 1861. 

Memorandum: Military Arrests 1 

[c. May 17, 1861] 

Unless the necessity for these arbitrary arrests is manifest, and 
urgent,, I prefer they should cease. A. Liisr COL/INT 

1 Copy, IHi-Nicolay and Hay Papers, IV, 5. The copy of U.S Attorney Ed- 
ward C Carrington's letter, May 1861, complaining that the military authori- 
ties were arresting, trying, and imprisoning citizens in the District of Columbia, 
bears also the copies of Lincoln's endorsement, General Joseph K. F. Mansfield's 
remarks, May 17, that he had ordered only two men into confinement, and 
General Scott's endorsement, May 18, stating that he had ordered only one 
Erastus Wood confined, as a spy. 

To Francis E Blair, Jr. 1 

Private 

Hon. F. P. Blair Washington D.C. May 18, 1861 

My Dear Sir. We have a good deal of anxiety here about St. 
Louis. I understand an order has gone from the War Department 
to you, to be delivered or withheld in your discretion, relieving 
Gen. Harney from his command. I was not quite satisfied with the 
order when it was made, though on the whole I thought it best to 
make it; but since then I have become more doubtful of its pro- 
priety. I do not write now to countermand it; but to say I wish you 
would withhold it, unless in your judgement the necessity to the 
contrary is very urgent. 

There are several reasons for this. "We better have him a friend 
than an enemy* It will dissatisfy a good many who otherwise would 
be quiet. More than all, we first relieved him, then restored him, 
& now if we relieve him again, the public will ask, "why all this 
vacillation." 

[372] 



MAY l8, l86l 

Still if, in your judgment, it is indispensable let it be so. Yours 
very truly A Li^rcoLrsr 

1 Copy, DLC-Nicolay Papers. On April 21, Brigadier General William S. 
Harney was relieved from command of the Department of the "West. AGO 
Special Orders No. 128., May 8, revoked the previous order. On May 16, Lin- 
coln approved General Scott's recommendation that Harney be placed on an 
indefinite leave of absence, and AGO Special Orders No. *35, again relieved 
Harney of command and granted the leave recommended. Further develop- 
ments brought the letter signed by Lorenzo Thomas, May 27, infra. 



To Salmon P. Chase 1 

Executive Mansion, May 18, 1861. 

My dear Sir: The suggestions of your note accompanying the 
commission for Mr. Dennison 2 as naval officer at New York have 
been considered in the same spirit of kindness in which I know' 
they were offered. They present the very difficulty which has em- 
barrassed me from the first in the case: that Mr. Dennison has not 
the position in the public eye which would lead to the expectation 
of his receiving so high an office. I believe I have told you fully 
what it was, and is, that pressed me to appoint him: the urgent so- 
licitation of an old friend 3 who has served me all my life, and who 
has never before received or asked anything in return. His (Mr. 
Dennison's) good character was vouched for from the start by 
many at New York, including Mr. Opdyke. 

At length, when I was, as it "were, in the very act of appointing 

him, Mr. 4 made a general charge of dishonesty against him. 

I pressed him for particulars, and it turned out that Mr. Dennison 
in his business as a lawyer had got some printing done for his 
clients, becoming personally responsible for the work, and had not 
paid for it when dunned. 5 While this, if true, is certainly not to be 
commended, I believe the like might, in some cases, be proven upon 
me. They are a class of debts which our clients ought to pay, and 
when we are personally dunned for them we sometimes hang fire. 
Besides, Mr. Dennison went far toward a satisfactory explanation 

of one case; and while Mr. intimated that there were other 

cases, he did not specify them. 

I consider that the charge of dishonesty has failed; and it now 
seems to me more difficult to change my purpose than if the charge 
had never been made. Yours as ever, A. LiisrcoiJN". 

1 NH, VI, 274-75- 

2 George Denison. See "Lincoln to Chase, May 6, suproy n. 3. 

3 See Lincoln to Robert Irwin, March 20, supra. 

4 Parke Godwin to Lincoln, April 16: "It is exceedingly important that the 

[373] 



MAY 18, l86l 

appointment of Mr. Denison as Naval Officer at New York should be delayed. 
I think I can show that he is a dishonest man. ..." (DLG-RTL). 

5 Godwin to Lincoln, April 20: ". . . there has been upon the Ledger of Wm. 
C. Bryant Co. various charges for Job Printing ordered by Mr. Denison and 
delivered to him for which he has steadily refused to pay." (DLC-RTL). 



Memorandum: Appointment of Monroe 1 

May 18, 1861 

JLet Mr. Monroe be appointed when it can be done consistently 
with previous committals. A. Liisrconisr 

1 ADS, owned by John W. Wholihan, Jackson, Michigan. There is no record 
of appointment for "Mr. Monroe." 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec- of War: Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: May 20, 1861 

Col. Julian Allen, a Polish gentleman, naturalized, proposes rais- 
ing a Regiment of our citizens of his nationality, to serve in our 
Army. He proposes getting them from the different States, without 
particular order, as can be most conveniently done, and organizing 
them here, so that they, as a Regiment, will hail from no particular 
State. Mr. Allen is highly recommended, as you will see by his 
testimonials. If he so raises and tenders a Regiment, I am in favor 
of accepting it, unless there be some objection which does not oc- 
cur to me. Yours truly, A. Lusrcousr. 

1 ALS, CSmH. Julian Allen was a Polish merchant of New York City. He 
received authority July 22, to raise a regiment of infantry, which was subse- 
quently merged into the Morgan Rifles. There is no record of Allen's service in 
the Union army. This letter is misdated May 30 in Tracy, p. 185. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

May 20, 1861 

Please have the Regiments named within, mustered, and re- 
ceived; and orders given as to where they shall go. Please answer 
as to what you do. Also, please say whether any heavy guns are 
going forward to Cairo? A. LINCOLN 

May 20. 861. 

i AES, IHi. Lincoln's note is written on the back of a telegram from Governor 
Richard Yates to Colonel John A. McClernand, May 18, 1861, which reported 
". . . Six additional Regiments for three years or the war called for from Illi- 

[374] 



MAY 20, l86l 

nois are ready. It is important they should be received immediately. . . .'* There 
is no reply from Cameron or any other official in the War Department, but see 
Lincoln to McCiernand, May 21, infra. 



To Edwin D. Morgan 1 

His Excellency Washington, D.C. 

Gov. E. D. Morgan May 20. 1861 

My dear Sir: Yours of the igth. is received. Your letter to the 
Secretary of War I have not seen. 

To not shirk just responsibility, I suppose I ought to admit that 
I had much to do with the matter of which you complain. 

The committee came here some time last week, 2 saying there 
were fourteen Regiments in N.Y. city, not within the 38 you were 
organizing; that something must be done with them, that they 
could not safely keep them longer, nor safely disband them. I could 
not see can not yet how it could wrong you, or the Regiments 
you "were raising, for these 14 to move forward at once, provided 
yours, too, should be received when ready. But aware of my own 
ignorance In military matters, I sent to Genl. Scott to get his 
opinion whether the thing could be safely done, both as to the 
question of confusion, and also whether the Govt. could advan- 
tageously keep and use the whole. His answer was that the whole 
should come of the 4[,]5 to come here, & 9 to Fortress Monroe. I 
thought the whole difficulty was solved, and directed an order to be 
made accordingly. I was even pleased with it; because I had been 
trying for two weeks to begin the collecting of a force at Fortress 
Monroe, and it now appeared as if this would begin. 

Next day & after the committee had gone, I was brought to fear 
that a squabble was to arise between you and the committee, by 
which neither your Regiments nor theirs, would move In any 
reasonable time; to avoid which, I wrote one of the committee 
Mr. Russell to send them at once. 3 

I am very loth to do any wrong; but I do not see yet wherein 
this was a wrong. 

I certainly did not know that any Regiments especially under 
your control were to be sent forward by the committee; but I do 
not perceive the substantial wrong, even in such a case. That It may 
be a technical wrong, I can readily understand but we are In no 
condition to waste time on technicalities. 

The enthusiastic uprising of the people in our cause, is our great 
reliance; and we can not safely give it any check, even though it 
overflows, and runs in channels not laid down In any chart. 

[375] 



3VCAY 21, l86l 

In ordering the 14 Regiments forward, no intimation was in- 
tended, that you were failing in activity, or in any duty. On the 
contrary, I acknowledge you have done, & are doing nobly; and 
for which I tender you my sincere thanks. Yours very truly 

A. 



1 ALS, N. Governor Morgan wrote May 19, 1861: ". . . the authority^ which 
has been given to the 'Union Defense Committee* to send fourteen Regiments 
from the city of New York . . . quite independent and irrespective of author- 
ity from the Executive of New York cannot fail to result in confusion and 
serious disaster. . . . (DLC-RTL). Hamilton Fish, chairman of the Union 
Defense Committee of New York, had been authorized by Cameron on May 
15 to send ". . . to this city [Washington] five regiments and to Fort Monroe nine 
regiments. . . . Should the Governor decline to do so. . . ." (OR, III, I, 206). 
On May 20, Cameron wrote Simeon Draper: "The concluding words of my or- 
der to your committee were not intended to confer authority to send on troops 
independent of Governor Morgan, but . . . only in case of Governor Morgan's 
refusal. . . ." (Ibid., p. 217). 

2 The committee called on Lincoln May 15. 

3 Lincoln's letter to Charles H. Russell, May 17, 1861, is presumably not 
extant. 

Revision of William H. Seward to 
Charles Francis Adams 1 

Department of State, 
Sir: Washington, May 2ist 1861 

Mr. Dallas in a brief dispatch of May sd. (No. 333) tells us 
that Lord John Russell recently requested an interview with him 
on account of the solicitude which His Lordship felt concerning 
the effect of certain measures represented as likely to be adopted by 
the President. In that conversation the British Secretary told Mr. 
Dallas that the three Representatives of the Southern Confederacy 
were then in London, that Lord John Russell had not yet seen 
them, but that he was not unwilling to see them unofficially. He 
farther informed Mr. Dallas that an understanding exists between 
the British and French Governments which would lead both to take 
one and the same course as to recognition. His Lordship then re- 
ferred to the rumor of a meditated blockade by us of Southern ports 
and a discontinuance of them as ports, of entry. Mr. Dallas an- 
swered that he knew nothing on those topics and therefore could 
say nothing. He added that you were expected to arrive in two 
weeks. Upon this statement Lord John Russell acquiesced in the 

1 ALS-F, ISLA. Seward's draft bears Lincoln's suggestions for revision and 
Seward's own later revisions. No effort has been made to snow all Seward's re- 
visions. Passages or words deleted by Lincoln have been bracketed, and comments 
and insertions in Lincoln's hand have been italicized either in the text or in the 
footnote. 

[376] 



MAY 2 1 .> l86l 

expediency of waiting for the full knowledge you were expected to 
bring. 

Mr. Dallas transmitted to us some newspaper reports of Minis- 
terial explanations made in Parliament. 

You will base no proceedings on parliamentary debates farther 
than to seek explanations when necessary and communicate them 
to this Department. "We intend to have a clear and simple record 
of whatever issue may arise between us and Great Britain. 2 

The President [is surprised and grieved] regrets that Mr, Dallas 
did not protest against the proposed unofficial intercourse between 
the British Government and the missionaries of the insurgents, [as 
well as against the demand for explanations made by the British 
Government] , 3 It is due however to Mr. Dallas to say that our in- 
structions had been given only to you and not to him., and that his 
loyalty and fidelity, too rare in these times, [among our late repre- 
sentatives abroad, are confessed and] 4 are appreciated. 

Intercourse of any kind with the so-called Commissioners is li- 
able to be construed as a recognition of the authority which ap- 
pointed them. Such intercourse would be none the less [wrongful] 
hurtful to us, for being called unofficial, and it might be even more 
injurious, because we should have no means of knowing \vhat 
points might be resolved by it. Moreover, unofficial intercourse is 
useless and meaningless, if it is not expected to ripen into official 
intercourse and direct recognition. It is left doubtful here whether 
the proposed unofficial intercourse has yet actually begun. Your 
own [present] antecedent instructions are deemed explicit enough, 
and it is hoped that you have not misunderstood them. You will in 
any event desist from all intercourse whatever, unofficial as well as 
official with the British Government, so long as it shall continue 
intercourse of either kind with the domestic enemies of this 
country; [confining yourself simply to a delivery of a copy of this 
paper to the Secretary of State. After doing this] 5 ivhen intercourse 
shall have been arrested for this cause y you will communicate with 
this Department and receive further directions. 

Lord John Russell has informed us of an understanding between 
the British and French Governments that they will act together in 
regard to our affairs. This communication however loses something 
of its value from the circumstance that the communication was 
withheld until after knowledge of the fact had been acquired by 
us from other sources. We know also another fact that has not yet 

2 Leave out. 

3 Leave out y because it does not appear that such explanations were demanded. 

4 Leave out. 5 Leave out. 

[377] 



MAY 21, l86l 

been officially communicated to us namely that other European 
States are apprized by France and England of their agreement and 
are expected to concur with or follow them in whatever measures 
they adopt on the subject of recognition. The United States have 
been impartial and just in all their conduct towards the several 
nations of Europe. They will not complain however of the combi- 
nation now announced by the two leading powers, although they 
think they had a right to expect a more independent if not a more 
friendly course from each of them. You will take no notice of that 
or any other alliance. Whenever the European governments shall 
see fit to communicate directly with us we shall be as heretofore 
frank and explicit in our reply. 

As to the blockade, you will say that by [the] our oivn laws [of 
nature] and the laws [o/ nature and the laws} 6 of nations this 
government has a clear right to suppress insurrection. An exclusion 
of commerce from national ports which have been seized by the 
insurgents, in the equitable form of blockade, is a proper means 
to that end. You will not insist 7 that our blockade is to be respected 
if it be not maintained by a competent force but passing by any 
immaterial question* that question as not now a practical or at 
least an urgent one you "will add that the blockade is now and it 
will continue to be so maintained, and therefore we expect it to be 
respected by Great Britain. You will add that we have already re- 
voked the exequatur of a Russian Consul who had enlisted in the 
Military service of the insurgents and we shall dismiss or demand 
the recall of every foreign agent, Consular or Diplomatic who shall 
either disobey the Federal laws or disown the Federal authority. 

As to the recognition of the so called Southern Confederacy it 
is not to be made a subject of technical definition. It is of course 
direct 9 recognition to publish an acknowledgment of the sover- 
eignty and independence of a new power. It is direct recognition 
to receive its ambassadors Ministers agents or commissioners offi- 
cially. A concession of belligerent rights is liable to be construed 
as a recognition of them. No one of these proceedings will [be 
borne] pass unnoticed^ by the United States in this case. 

Hitherto recognition has been moved only on the assumption 
that the so-called Confederate States are de facto a self sustaining 

6 The latter part of the insertion "of nature and the laws" has been crossed 
out, whether by Lincoln or Seward is uncertain 

7 "Admit" is deleted and "not insist" inserted, by Seward. 

8 Seward deleted Lincoln's "any immaterial question" and added "that question 
as not now a practical or at least an urgent one." 

9 Lincoln's "quasi" changed by Seward to "direct** in both instances 

10 Seward changed Lincoln's "unnoticed" to "unquestioned." 

[378] 



MAY 21, l86l 

power. Now after long forbearance, designed to soothe discontent 
and avert the need of civil war, the land and naval forces of the 
United States have been put in motion to repress the insurrection. 
The true character of the pretended new State is at once revealed. 
It is seen to be a Power existing in pronunciamento only. It has 
never won a field. It has obtained no forts that were not virtually 
betrayed into its hands or seized in breach of trust. It commands 
not a single port on the coast nor any highway out from its pre- 
tended Capital by Land. Under these circumstances Great Britain 
is called upon to intervene and give it body and independence by 
resisting our measures of suppression. British recognition would be 
British intervention to create within our own territory a hostile 
State by overthrowing this Republic itself. [When this act of in- 
tervention is distinctly performed, we, from that hour, shall cease 
to be friends and (become once more, as we have twice before 
been), be forced to [become] enemies of Great Britain.] 11 

As to the treatment of privateers in the insurgent service you 
will say that this is a question exclusively our own. We treat them 
as pirates. They are our own citizens, or persons employed by our 
citizens, preying on the commerce of our country. If Great Britain 
shall choose to recognise them as lawful belligerents, and give them 
shelter from our pursuit and punishment, the law of nations afford 
an adequate and proper remedy [and we shall avail ourselves of 
it.] 12 And while you need not to say this in advance , be sure that 
you say nothing inconsistent ivith z. 13 

Happily, however Her Britannic Majesty's Government can 
avoid all these difficulties. It invited us in 1856 to accede to the 
declaration of the Congress of Paris, of which body Great Britain 
was herself a member, abolishing privateering everywhere in all 
cases and for ever. You already have our authority to propose to 
her our accession to that declaration. If she refuse to receive it it 
can only be because she is willing to become the patron of priva- 
teering when aimed at our devastation. 

These positions are not elaborately defended now, because to 
vindicate them would imply a possibility of our waiving them. 

14 We are not insensible of the grave importance of this occasion. 

11 Leave out. Lincoln's "leave out" Is also deleted and parentheses inserted to 
suggest a lesser deletion rather than the whole sentence. 12 Omit. 

13 Lincoln's insertion has been crossed out, 

14 Drop all from this line to the end, and in lieu of it, write "This paper is for 
your own guidance only 9 and not to be read, or shown to any one. ["] This 
suggestion was crossed out, presumably by Seward, and the remaining para- 
graphs remained in the communication. Seward incorporated Lincoln's "for 
your own guidance only," however, in two introductory paragraphs inserted 
at the beginning of the letter. 

[379] 



MAY 21, l86l 

"We see how upon the result of the debate in which we are engaged, 
a war may ensue, between the United States and one, two, or even 
more European nations. War in any case is as exceptionable from 
the habits as it is revolting from the sentiments of the American 
people. But if it come it will be fully seen that it results from the 
action of Great Britain, not our own, that Great Britain will have 
decided to fraternize with our domestic enemy either without wait- 
ing to hear from you our remonstrances and our warnings or after 
having heard them. War in defence of national life is not immoral, 
and war in defence of independence is an inevitable part of the dis- 
cipline of nations. 

The dispute will be between the European and the American 
branches of the British race. All who belong to that race will es- 
pecially deprecate it; as they ought. It may well be believed that 
men of every race and kindred will deplore it. A war not unlike it 
between the same parties occurred at the close of the last century. 
Europe atoned by forty years of suffering for the error that Great 
Britain committed in provoking that contest. If that nation shall 
now repeat the same great error, the social convulsions which will 
follow may not be so long but they will be more general. When 
they shall have ceased it will, we think, be seen, whatever may 
have been the fortunes of other nations that it is not the United 
States that will have come out of them with its precious consti- 
tution altered or its honestly obtained dominion in any degree 
abridged. Great Britain has but to wait a few months and all her 
present inconveniences will cease with all our own troubles. If she 
take a different course she will calculate for herself the ultimate as 
well as the immediate consequences, and will consider what posi- 
tion she will hold when she shall have forever lost the sympathies 
and the affections of the only nation on whose sympathies and 
affections she has a natural claim. In making that calculation she 
will do -well to remember that in the controversy she proposes to 
open we shall be actuated by neither pride, nor passion, nor cupid- 
ity, nor ambition; but we shall stand simply on the principle of 
self preservation and that our cause will involve the independence 
of nations and the rights of human nature. 

I am, sir, respectfully your obedient servant, W.H.S. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion May ai. 1861 

My dear Sir Why can not Col. Small's Philadelphia Regiment 
be received? I sincerely wish it could. There is something strange 

[380] 



3V! A Y 2 2 9 l86l 

about it. Give these gentlemen an interview, and take their Regi- 
ment. Yours truly A. 



1 AL.S, IHi. Colonel William F. Small's regiment was the Twenty-sixth Penn- 
sylvania, organized shortly after Lincoln's election in 1860, accepted April 18, 

1861, to report to Washington through Baltimore. Attacked by the mob at Balti- 
more, the regiment returned to Philadelphia. Maintained by private funds from 
April 20 to May 25, it was ordered into federal service "with the muster dating 
back to May 5. 



To John A. McClemand 1 

Hon. J. A. McClernand Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: May at. 1861 

I have just had the interview with Gen. Cameron. He says the 
six Illinois Regiments shall be received at once, and probably sent 
to Cairo that he does not know, but will ascertain, whether heavy 
guns have gone to Cairo that he thinks well of the proposition to 
buy the surplus produce on the Ohio 2 and that he wishes to see 
you, and will admit you whenever you will send in your card. 

I wish you to go. Your Obt. Servt. A. 



1 ALS, RPB. See Lincoln to Cameron, May 20, supra, in regard to the Illinois 
regiments. 

2 McClernand suggested that the government devise a plan to purchase surplus 
produce which the blockade deprived of its normal Southern outlets. 



To Gideon Welles 1 

Hon. Sec. of Navy Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir May 21, 1861 

The bearer of this master Walter Trumbull is a son of our 
Illinois Senator Trumbull. He wishes to be admitted into the Naval 
school, and I wish you may be able to oblige him. Please give him 
an interview, at all events. Yours very truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, owned by Charles W. Olsen, Chicago, Illinois. Walter Trumbull is 
listed as midshipman on probation at the Naval Academy as of September 30, 
1863- 



Approval of American Tract Society's Program 
of Distributing Books to Soldiers 1 

Executive Mansion, May 22. 1861 

I approve Mr. Broughton's object as indicated by the within let- 
ter of Gov. Andrew. A. LINCOLN 

[381] 



MAY 22, l86l 

1 ALS-F, THaroL Printed in facsimile on a broadside distribued by the Amer- 
ican Tract Society, Lincoln's note is described as written upon the back of a letter 
from Governor John A. Andrew to Lincoln, May 18, 1861, introducing N. 
Broughton, Jr., of Boston, who wished to make arrangements for systematic dis- 
tribution of religious books to the troops. 



Memoranda : 
Appointment of Charles H. Tillinghast 1 

Gen. James, of Rhode Island., wishes Charles H. Tillinghast, of 
N.Y. nephew of the Genl. to be a cadet at West-Point. 
May ssd 1861. 

Charles H. Tillinghast, already on the list for "West-Point ap- 
pointments, to be marked, as from Rhode-Island. 
Gen. James, "wants this. 

* AD, DNA WR RG 94, U.S. Military Academy, 1861, No. 846, Box 79. The 
first memorandum is dated May 22, 1861, by a hand not Lincoln's. The second is 
undated. Charles T. James was an ex-senator from Rhode Island (1851-1857) and 
major general of the Rhode Island militia. 

To Edwin D. Morgan 1 

Washington, May 22, 1861. 

Governor E. D. Morgan, Albany, N.Y.: I wish to see you face to 
face to clear these difficulties about forwarding troops from New 
York. A. 



1 Tarbell (Appendix), p. 341. Governor Morgan replied May 24, 1861, that 
he had planned to visit Lincoln, but "... learning that Colonel [William B.] 
Franklin of the 12th Infy had been charged with duties at New York in relation 
to the movement of troops, I deemed it unnecessary." (DLC-RTL). 



Remarks at Raising of the Flag 
over the General Post Office Building 1 

May 22, 1861 

The President, having advanced to the front of the platform, was 
enthusiastically greeted from the crowd. He said: 

SIR Permit me to say, in response to your invitation, that I am 
very happy, upon this, as upon all occasions, to be an humble instru- 
ment in forwarding the very worthy object which you have expressed. 
I therefore shall take pleasure in performing the part assigned me 
upon this occasion, and I hope in a satisfactory manner. I suppose that 
extended remarks are not expected of me at this time, but that it is 

[382] 



MAY 2 3, l86l 

desired by all that we shall proceed at once to the work in hand, of 
raising our glorious national ensign to the proud and lofty eminence 
from which it is designed to have it wave, I am now ready to perform 
my part. 

The ropes attached to the staff, and on -which the flag was fas- 
tened, were then placed in the hands of the President, when, amid 
the most deafening applause from the crowd below., the flag was 
raised to its prominent position. There being but a slight breeze at 
the time of its reaching its place at the top of the staff, it remained 
for a moment or two motionless, when suddenly, a gentle wind 
rising from the north, its ample folds were extended to the breeze 
in a most graceful and beautiful manner, eliciting one universal 
outburst of applause from the assembled multitude, which was 
kept up for some time, as the flag continued waving its folds, ex- 
tending in the direction of the South, as if offering to ensure pro- 
tection to the advocates and upholders of the government and 
principles of which it was emblematical in that section of the 
country. This happy incident had the effect of eliciting the follow- 
ing appropriate remarks from the President: 

LADIES AISTD GENTLEMEN I had not thought to say a word, but it has 
occurred to me that a few weeks ago the "Stars and Stripes" hung 
rather languidly about the staff all over the nation. So, too, -with this 
flag, when it was elevated to its place. At first it hung rather languidly, 
but the glorious breeze came, and it now floats as it should. (Cries of 
"Good," and applause) And we hope that the same breeze is swelling 
the glorious flag throughout the whole nation. 

1 New York Herald, May 23, 1861. The report in the Washington National Re- 
publican., May 23, 1861, has slight verbal differences but is substantially the 



To Edward Bates 1 

Hon. Attorney General. Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: May 23. 1861 

Please send me a commission for Joseph Casey, of Perm, as Judge 
of the court of claims, to fill the vacancy now existing. Yours truly 

A. 



3-AL.S, DNA GE RG 60, Papers of Attorney General, Segregated Lincoln 
Material. 

To John A. Dahlgren 1 

Capt. Dahlgren. Executive Mansion, May 23. 1861 

My dear Sir Allow me to introduce Col. J. A. McClernand, M. 
C. of my own District in Illinois. If he should desire to visit Fortress 

[383] 



MAY 23, l86l 

Monroe, please introduce turn to the Captain of one of the vessel [s] 
in our service, and pass him down and back. Yours very truly 

A. LI3NTGOL3ST 

1 A3LS, OKB. Captain John A. Dahlgren was in command of the Washington 
Navy Yard and later became chief of ordnance for the Navy. 



Memorandum: Appointment of Lewis 1 

May 23, 1861 

Mr. Lewis, besides the recommendation of Mr. Barney, within, 
is introduced to me by Mr. Elisha Whittlesey, 2 who takes great 
interest in him. Let him be appointed as soon as he consistently 
can. A. LINCOLN 

May 23, 1861 

1 Parke-Bernet Catalog 841, February 25, 1947, No. 157. Lincoln's memoran- 
dum appears, according to the catalog description, on the last page of a three- 
page petition for an army appointment, signed by John A. Dix, secretary of the 
Treasury during the last few weeks of Buchanan's administration, and ap- 
pointed a major general of volunteers by Lincoln on May 16. Lewis has not been 
identified. 

2 Elisha Whittlesey of Ohio, first comptroller of the Treasury 1849-1857, reap- 
pointed by Lincoln to the same office. 



To Edwin D. Morgan 1 

His Excellency Washington, D.C. 

Gov. E. D. Morgan. May 23, 1861 

My dear Sir Will you please state to Gen. Walbridge 2 what are 
the substantial difficulties about the "fourteen regiments" coming 
forward? I very much wish to get this matter straight, without 
wrong to the public service, or to any individual. Yours very truly 

A. LINCOLN 

P. S. You can talk to Gen. W. confidentially. A L. 

1 ALS, N. See also Lincoln to Morgan, May 20, supra 

2 Probably Hiram Walbridge, a brigadier general of Ohio militia (1843) who 
was a New York merchant and ex-congressman (1853-1855). 



To Simon Cameron 1 

If the Secretary of War can accept the Regiments named within, 
I shall be greatly gratified. A. LINCOLN 

May 24 [26 ?], 1861 

[384] 



MAY 2 5^ l86l 

1 Angle, p. 273 Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of a letter May 
21, 1861, signed by the colonels commanding the six regiments of the first brigade 
of Indiana volunteers. The date may be May 26, as this same endorsement is 
listed in William D. Morley, Inc. Catalog, October 13, 1944, No. 272. 



To Winfield Scott 1 

Lieutenant General Scott Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir May 24. 1861 

What think you of the propriety of yourself, or the more imme- 
diate commander Genl. Mansfield, 2 as I understand taking the 
occasion of occupying Alexandria & Arlington Heights, to make a 
proclamation to the citizens of those places, and vicinity, assuring 
them that they are not to be despoiled, but can have your pro- 
tection, if they will accept it, and inviting such as may have left 
their homes, and business to return? 

Mr. Nicolay will show you a Telegram, which will not displease 
you. 3 Your Obedient ServL A. Lntcou* 

1 ALS-P, ISLA. Lincoln's suggestion "was f ollowed the next day, Charles W. 
Sandford, major general of New York militia, leading the movement. 

2 Joseph 1C. F. Mansfield, in command of the Department of Washington. 

3 The telegram has not been located. 



To Ephraim D. and Phoebe EHs worth 1 

To the Father and Mother of Col. Washington D.C. 

Elmer E. Ellsworth: May 25. 1861 

My dear Sir and Madam, In the untimely loss of your noble 
son, our affliction here, is scarcely less than your own. So much of 
promised usefulness to one's country, and of bright hopes for one's 
self and friends, have rarely been so suddenly dashed, as in his fall. 
In size, in years, and in youthful appearance, a boy only, his power 
to command men, was surpassingly great. This power, combined 
with a fine intellect, an indomitable energy, and a taste altogether 
military, constituted in him, as seemed to me, the best natural 
talent, in that department, I ever knew'. And yet he was singularly 
modest and deferential in social intercourse. My acquaintance with 
him began less than two years ago; yet through the latter half of 
the intervening period, it was as intimate as the disparity of our 
ages, and my engrossing engagements, would permit. To me, he 
appeared to have no indulgences or pastimes; and I never heard 
him utter a profane, or an intemperate word. What was conclusive 
of his good heart, he never forgot his parents. The honors he la- 

[385] 



MAY 26, l86l 

bored for so laudably, and, in the sad end, so gallantly gave his 
life, he meant for them, no less than for himself. 

In the hope that it may be no intrusion upon the sacredness of 
your sorrow, I have ventured to address you this tribute to the 
memory of my young friend, and your brave and early fallen 
child. 

May God give you that consolation which is beyond all earthly 
power. Sincerely your friend in a common affliction 

A. 



1 ALS, CSmH. Elmer E. Ellsworth was killed at Alexandria, Virginia, May 24 
See Lincoln to Cameron, March 5, and to Ellsworth, April 15, supra, and notes. 
Ephraim D. Ellsworth acknowledged Lincoln's letter, June 19, 1861, with ". . . 
grateful thanks for your kindness to and interest you have shown in our beloved 
son. . . ." (DLC-RTL). 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Simon Cameron Washington D.C. 

Sec. of War. May 2 6th 1861. 

Dear Sir, I am very much inclined to accept Col. Einsteins 
Regiment and wish you would have it mustered into service as 
soon as possible if in any way consistent with our arrangements. 
Your truly A. 



1 LS, DLC-Cameron Papers. Colonel Max Einstein's Twenty-seventh Pennsyl- 
vania, reorganized at Philadelphia after return from the Baltimore riots, was ac- 
cepted and mustered in, May 30-31, 1861. 



To Washington A. Bartlett 1 

Washington, May 27, 1861. 

CoL W. A. Bartlett, New York: The Naval Brigade was to go 
to Fort Monroe without trouble to the Government, and must so 
go or not at all. A. 



1 Tarbell (Appendix), p. 341. Lincoln had received a communication from 
Bray & Merwin of New York, May 25, 1861: "We have reed an order from 
CoL Bartlett Naval Brigade for twenty five hundred pair shoes . . . drawers 
. . . socks . . . bandana handkerchiefs . . . shall we deliver them upon your 
authority. . . ." (DLC-RTL). Bartlett replied to Lincoln, May 27, "Merwin 
& Bray had no authority to telegraph to you about our contract ... it -was not 
our fault we could not have suspected it. ... We are ready & will sail as 
ordered . . . without troubling you. Your letter & teleg[rap]h reed. . . ." 
(DLC-RTL). Lincoln's letter to Bartlett, presumably dated May 25, is not ex- 
tant. Bartlett had been a lieutenant in the Navy, and served as the first Amer- 
ican alcalde of San Francisco in 1846. In April, 1861, he organized a brigade 
of seamen, but there is no record of his service in the army in i8@i, 

[386] 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: May 27, 1861 

If there be any vacancy of a cadetship at West-Point, at the spe- 
cial request of Mr. Senator Harris., I wish to appoint Jared L. Rath- 
born to it, provided he fills the conditions. Yours truly 

A. LINCOLN 

i ALS, DNA WR RG 94, U.S. Military Academy, 1861, No. 695, Box 79. At 
request of Senator Ira Harris, Jared L., Rathbone was appointed from New York. 



Lorenzo Thomas to William S. Harney 1 

Washington, D.C., May 27, 1861. 

Sir: The President observes with concern that, notwithstanding 
the pledge of the State authorities to cooperate in preserving peace 
in Missouri., loyal citizens in great numbers continue to be driven 
from their homes. It is immaterial whether these outrages continue 
from inability or indisposition on the part of the State authorities 
to prevent them. It is enough that they continue to devolve on you 
the duty of putting a stop to them summarily by the force under 
your command, to be aided by such troops as you may require from 
Kansas, Iowa, and Illinois. The professions of loyalty to the Union 
by the State authorities of Missouri are not to be relied upon. They 
have already falsified their professions too often, and are too far 
committed to secession to be entitled to your confidence, and you 
can only be sure of their desisting from their wicked purposes when 
it is out of their power to prosecute them. You will therefore be 
unceasingly watchful of their movements, and not permit the 
clamors of their partizans and opponents of the wise measures al- 
ready taken to prevent you from checking every movement against 
the government, however disguised under the pretended State au- 
thority. The authority of the United States is paramount, and 
whenever it is apparent that a movement, whether by color of 
State authority or not, is hostile, you will not hesitate to put it 
down, 

I am, sir, very respectfully your obedient servant, 

L. THOMAS, Adjutant-General, 

1 NH, VI, 288-89. That Lincoln drafted this letter for Adjutant General 
Thomas is possible, "but the original has not been located. It is included in the 
present work pn the basis of NIcolay and Hay's inclusion of it in the Complete 
Works, and in the absence of satisfactory evidence to the contrary. 

[387] 



To Carl Schiirz 1 

May 27, 1861 

If it will make no confusion, Let all the german Regiments be of 
those going to Fort-Monroe. 

This will only, at most, transform, and not change the propor- 
tions going there and coming here. LINCOLN 

May 27. 1861. 

1 ALS, DLC-Sclmrz Papers, See Lincoln to Schurz, May 16, supra. 

To Lorenzo Thomas 1 

Gen. Thomas, Executive Mansion, May 27, 1861. 

The three gentlemen who will hand you this note, belong to an 
Artillery Company at Baltimore who wish to get into the United 
States Service . . . and ... if you advise it, I will receive them. 
I hate to reject any offer from what is called a Southern State. . . . 

A. 



1 Tracy, p. 184. Concerning this fragmentary text, there is no available iden- 
tification of the men involved, but the New York Herald., May 28, 1861, reports 
the Eagle Artillery of Baltimore accepted by the president. There is no official 
record of the acceptance of the Eagle Artillery, however, until July, 1863. 

Endorsement: Order of Simon Cameron 
to Illinois and Indiana Regiments 1 

May 28, 1861. 

Let this order be entered as It now stands, I holding for further 
consideration the subject-matter of what I have erased. 

A. 



1 OR, III, I, 240. Cameron's order (ibid.} is given as follows, with no indica- 
tion of Lincoln's erasures: 

""War Department, 'Washington, May 28, 1861. 

"The six regiments of troops in Indiana and the six regiments in Illinois, all 
which are now in the service of the United States, and commonly called three- 
months' men, or any one or more of said regiments, may forthwith or as soon as 
practicable report their readiness to Major-General McClellan, and by, him, or 
under his order, be received in and attached to the longer service, commonly 
called three-years' men; provided that no officer or private is held under obliga- 
tion to such change, and no one of said regiments shall be received into said longer 
service in which regiment more than one-fifth their number decline the change; 
and in cases of regiments received, the individuals declining, being not more than 
one-fifth of the whole, may be discharged at once, their places to be supplied as 
fast as possible by voluntary recruits. Any of the aforesaid regiments not being 
transferred to the longer service, according to the terms of the order, will remain 
in their present three-month service. 

"By special order of the President: SIMON CAMERON, 

Secretary of War." 

[388] 



Endorsement: Petition of Citizens 
of Pekin 5 Illinois^ for Pardon of James Foley 1 

May 28, 1861 

The within Petitioners, are my intimate acquaintances, and are 
most respectable people. Will Judge Bates Atty. General please 
see \vhether their prayer can be granted? A LINCOLN 

May 28. 1861 

1 AES, ORB. James Foley was, according to the petition, a former resident of 
Pekin, Illinois, who had joined the army and had Been convicted of murder. The 
document bears no other endorsements. Reverend Thomas J. Mooney, chaplain 
of the Sixty-ninth New York Militia, wrote Lincoln June 14, 1861, ". . . to pre- 
sent my most sincere and grateful thanks together with those of our worthy 
Colonel, and officers . . . for the clemency and great mercy which you have ex- 
tended towards James Foley in commuting the sentence of death ... to that 
of imprisonment. . . ." (DLC-RTL). 

To Gideon Welles 1 

Hon: Secretary of the Navy Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir May 28. 1861 

A friend of mine, residing at Chicago, Illinois Mr. C. Beckwith 
has a lady-relative Miss Elizabeth Smith at St. Marts, in 
Florida, whom he much desires to have brought away from there; 
and he has been induced to think that some of our vessels connected 
with the blockade could effect this without much trouble. If this is 
practicable I shall be obliged if you will direct it to be done. Yours 
truly A. LirsrcoLisr 

1 ALS, DNA WR NB RG 45, Executive Letters, No. 153. Welles to Lincoln, 
August 7, 1861, encloses copies of the reports of naval officers 'who failed in their 
efforts to remove Miss Smith from the South (DLC-RTL.) . 

To Winfield Scott 1 

[May 29, 1861] 
For Lieut. Genl. Scott 

A few days ago I said to the commissioner of Indian affairs that 
I would appoint whoever he named for Superintendent of Indian 
affairs in Washington. The commissioner tells me he has intimated 

1 AE, DLC-RTL. Lincoln's incomplete endorsement appears at bottom of Scott 
to Caleb B. Smith, May 27, 1861, following Smith's endorsement concurring in 
Scott's recommendation, May 29. Scott's letter introduces the bearer Bion F, 
Kendall, a native of Maine resident in Washington Territory, -who had ". . . ex- 
ecuted a confidential mission for me of great danger & importance; taking him 
thro* nearly all the seceded states. . . .** and who wished to he superintendent 
of Indian affairs in Washington Territory. Kendall was appointed to the office, 
July 16, 1861. 

[389] 



To Edward Bates 1 

My Dear Sir May 30. 1861 

Will you do the favor to confer with Mr. Johnson and be pre- 
paring to present the argument for the suspension of the Habeas 
Corpus Very respectfully yours A. LINCOLN" 

The Honorable I concur 

Atty Genl. William H. Seward 

1 LS-P, ISLA, The result of Reverdy Johnson's conference with Bates is not 
indicated in any immediate communication from Bates, but on July 5, 1861, the 
attorney general returned a twenty-six-page opinion, the gist of which was that 
if suspension was understood to mean "... a repeal of all power to issue the 
writ . . . none but Congress can do it. But if we are at liberty to understand the 
phrase to mean, that, in case of a great and dangerous rebellion, like the present, 
the public safety requires the arrest and confinement of persons implicated in that 
rebellion, I, as freely, declare the opinion that the President has lawful power to 
suspend the privilege of persons arrested under such circumstances " (DLC- 
KTL). 

To Seventh Regiment of New York 1 

THE PRESIDENT returns his thanks to the "Seventh Regiment" 
of New York, for their delightful serenade of last night. 

May 30, 1861 

1 "Washington Evening Star., May 30, 1861. 



To Lorenzo Thomas 1 

I wish Capt. Von Horn's company to be included in Hecker's 
Regiment from Chicago, Illinois. A LINCOLN 

May 30, 1861 

i AES, DNA WR RG 94, Adjutant General, Letters Received, 2O2-P-i86i. Lin- 
coln's endorsement appears on John Von Horn to Lincoln, May 30, 1861, request- 
ing inclusion of his company in Colonel Frederick Hecker's Twenty-fourth Illi- 
nois Volunteers. 



To Salmon E Chase 1 

Hon. Sec. of Treasury, May 31, 1861 

If it is determined, as I suppose, that Mr. Muller be appointed, 

let it be done at once; as by the above it appears to be necessary. 

Yours truly, A. LUX-COUNT 

May 31, 1861. 

1 Tracy, p. 185. See Lincoln to Chase, May 9, supra, and note. 

[390] 



To Caleb B. Smith 1 

May 31, 1861 

It is perceived within that Mr. Irvins* friends desire him to be 

Superintendent of Utah. Is there any such office, other than the 

Superintendent of Indian Affairs, which has already been filled? 

Hon's. Messrs Stratton & Nixon of N. J. present this paper to me. 

May 31.1861 A. 



1 ALS, DLC-Nicolay Papers. The accompanying document is no longer with 
Lincoln's note, and attempts to identify Irvin have failed. The persons present- 
ing the request were John T. Nixon and John L N. Stratton, representatives from 
New Jersey. 



To Caleb B. Smith 1 

Executive Mansion. Washington 3ist. May 1861 
I hereby appoint Charles E. Mix to be acting Commissioner of 
Indian Affairs, during the temporary absence of the Commissioner 
from the Seat of Government. ABRAHAM 



i LS, DNA NR RG 75, Office of Indian Affairs, Letters Received, 1861, Miscel- 
laneous, P-422. William P. Dole was commissioner of Indian affairs. 



To Caleb B. Smith 1 

May 31, 1861 

When I was a member of Congress a dozen years ago, I boarded 

with the lady who writes the within letter. She is a most worthy 

and deserving lady; and if what she desires can be consistently 

done, I shall be much obliged I say this sincerely and earnestly. 

May 31, 1861 A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, ORB. Mrs. Ann G. Sprigg, widow of Benjamin Sprigg, kept a boarding 
house in 1848-1849 on First Street, E., between A Street, S. and East Capitol 
Street. No record has been found of Mrs. Sprigg's request. On the bottom of the 
page following Lincoln's note is the following: 

"Hon Mr Smith: 

"We boarded some months, with Mrs. Sprigg, & found her a most estimable 
lady & would esteem it a personal favor, if her request, could be granted. 

"MRS. A. 



To Edward Bates 1 

Send up the commissions, according to the within request. 
June i, 1861. A. LINCOLN 

[391] 



JTU3NTE 1, 1 8 6 1 

* AES, DNA GE RG 60, Papers of Attorney General, Segregated Lincoln Ma- 
terial. Lincoln's endorsement appears on the back of Bates to Lincoln, June i, 
1861, "May I appoint for the Western District of Missouri ... for Attorney 
Jonas J. Clark/for Marshal James O. Sitton? I have just gotten a telegram 
from our friend S. T. Glover requesting these appointments, & urging speed." 
Sitton is listed in the office named, as of September 30, 1861, but Robert J. Lackey 
is listed as attorney on the same date. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War. Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: June i. 1861 

Mrs. Capt. Burton is very desirous that her husband may be 
made a Colonel. I do not know him personally; but i it can be done 
without injustice to other officers of the Regular Army, I -would 
like for her to be obliged. Yours truly A. LINCOLN. 

1 ALS, DLC-Cameron Papers. Probably Captain Burton was Henry S. Burton 
of the Third Regiment of Artillery whose promotion to major, sent to the Senate 
December 6, 1861, was back-dated to May 14. 



Meinorandum : 
Appointment of Edwin S. McCook 1 

June i, 1861 

Edwin S. McCook, is excellently well recommended within for 
a Lieutenancy in the Regular Army, and I hope it can, without 
injustice to others be given him. A. LIIXTCOUNT 

June i, 1861. 

* AES-P, ISLA. Edwin S. McCook of Pekin, Illinois, attended the U.S. Naval 
Academy and served as midshipman 1854-1856. He was not appointed to the 
regular army, but raised a company and became captain in the Thirty- first Illi- 
nois Infantry, September 18, 1861. 



Memorandum : 
Appointment of William P. Jones, Jr. 1 

This applicant hails from Connecticut, and is well recommended. 
Let him be placed on the list. A. LmcoLisr 

June 3, 1861 

i AES, DNA WR RG 94, U.S. Military Academy, 1861, No. 445, Box 78. Ian- 
coin's endorsement is on the back of a letter of application from William P. Jones, 
Sr., New York City, June a, 861, recommending "William P. Jones, Jr., of Stam- 
ford, Connecticut. There is no record of an appointment. 

[392] 



Memorandum : 
Appointment of Charles L. Thomasson 1 

Let this case stand high for a chance. A. 

June 3, 1861 

1 AES, CSmEL Lincoln's endorsement Is on the Lack of Thomasson to Lincoln, 
Louisville, Kentucky, May 20, 1861, on the bottom of -which is a recommendation 
by Joshua F. Speed, for appointment of Thomasson as paymaster. He was not 
appointed to the regular army, but became a captain in the Fifth Kentucky In- 
fantry. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

June 4, 1861 

I am personally acquainted with Dr. Prince, and know him to 
be of excellent private character, and a Surgeon of the highest repu- 
tation. A. LINCOLN 
June 4, 1861 

1 AES, DNA WR RG 107, Secretary of "War, Personnel Appointments, Box 5. 
Lincoln's endorsement is on the back of Benjamin Norris to Nicolay, Pittsfield, 
Illinois, May 23, 1861, recommending Dr. David Prince of Jacksonville, Illinois. 
Dr. Prince was appointed surgeon with rank of major, August 3, 1861. 

Reply to Don Marcelino Hurtado 1 

June 4, 1861 

Mr. HURTADO: I receive with pleasure a Minister Plenipoten- 
tiary from the Republic of the Granadian Confederacy. Your 
country contains one of the principal highways of commerce and 
intercourse between the Atlantic and the Pacific States of this 
Union. The people of the two countries cannot, therefore, be stran- 
gers to each other; they must be friends, and in some measure al- 
lies. It shall be no fault of mine if they ever cease to be such. 

The republican system of government, which has been adopted 
so generally on this continent, has proved its adaptation to what is 
the first purpose of government every where the maintenance of 
national independence. It is my confident hope and belief that this 
system will be found, after sufficient trials, to be better adapted 
every where than any other to other great interests of human so- 
ciety namely, the preservation of peace, order, and national 
prosperity. I sincerely hope that this may be the happy result of 
the experiment of the system in your country. 

I bid you welcome, sir, to the society of the capital. 

1 Washington Daily National Intelligencer, June 5, 1861. Hurtado presented 
his credentials as commissioner and envoy extraordinary and minister plenipo- 
tentiary of Granada, and made a hrief speech to which Lincoln replied. 

[393] 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir June 5. 1861 

Herewith I send a draft for an order giving Gen. McClland 
[McClellan] discretion to receive a particular company. There is 
no cheat about it. Mr. Sturges, who brings this to you is a man of 
large means, and of the highest character. 

Inclosed also is Gen. Scott's note, substantially assenting to the 
order Yours truly A. LnNrcoL]sr 

1 ALS, IHi. William Sturges, a Chicago banker, wrote to Lincoln, May 27, 
1861, that his father, Solomon Sturges '*. . . left this morning to visit Genl Mc- 
Clellan at Cincinnati. . . . He will see you latter part of the week. We are very 
anxious the Rifle Company he has armed uniformed & equipped & who have been 
in camp now for some time should have orders to go to Washington. . , ." (DLC- 
RTL). The Sturges Rifles went to West Virginia where the company served as 
McClellan's bodyguard, and upon McClellan's being given command of the 
Army of the Potomac were transferred to Washington. Search for the draft of 
Lincoln's order has been of no avail. 

To Winfield Scott 1 

Private 

Lieut. Genl. Scott Executive Mansion June 5. 1861 

My dear Sir Doubtless you begin to understand how disagree- 
able it is to me to do a thing arbitrarily, when it is unsatisfactory to 
others associated with me. 

I very much wish to appoint Col. Meigs Quarter-Master General, 
and yet Gen. Cameron does not quite consent. I have come to know 
Col. Meigs quite well for a short acquaintance, and, so far as I am 
capable of judging I do not know one who combines the qualities of 
masculine intellect, learning and experience of the right sort, and 
physical power of labor and endurance so well as he. 

I know he has great confidence in you, always sustaining so far 
as I have observed, your opinions, against any differing ones. 

You will lay me under one more obligation, if you can and will 
use your influence to remove Gen. Cameron's objection. I scarcely 
need tell you I have nothing personal in this, having never seen or 
heard of Col. Meigs, until about the end of last March. Your obt. 
Servt, A. LiisrcoLisr 

1 LS Copy, DLC-RTL. The copy is in John Hay's handwriting, signed by Lin- 
coln. General Scott wrote Lincoln, [June 5] , that "Nothing can be more kind than 
your courtesy to me in a matter so exclusively within your own competency as 
the appointment of a quarter Master general. ... It costs me nothing ... to 
support your preference. . . ." (DLC-RTL), Cameron to Lincoln, June 10, in- 
troducing Colonel Charles Thomas, the oldest officer in the quartermaster gen- 

[394] 



J- u INT E 8, 1861 

eraFs department, to see Lincoln about his promotion, indicated that Lincoln 
faced a problem of seniority in the department (ibid.). Montgomery C. Meigs, 
however, was nominated to the Senate, July 13, 1861, to be quartermaster gen- 
eral with rank of brigadier general from June 10, 1861. On August 5, Lincoln 
communicated to the Senate ". . . an error in the date of the appointment of 
Brigadier-General Montgomery C. Meigs ... by which his rank is dated after 
that of other officers, while his appointment was actually of earlier date. I there- 
fore, to correct this error, renominate ... to rank as such from the 15th day of 
May, 1861. . . ." (Executive Journal., XI, 543-44). One wonders, in view of the 
circumstances, whether the misdating of Meigs" appointment in the list of pro- 
motions sent to the Senate on July 13 was entirely inadvertent 



Testimonial Written for Ward H. Lamon 1 

Executive Mansion June 5 1861 

The bearer of this, W. H. Lamon, is entirely reliable, and trust- 
worthy. A. LINCOLN. 

1 ADS, CSmH. Lamon secured this testimonial to expedite his organization of 
a brigade of Unionist Virginians, who, forced to leave their homes, had concen- 
trated in such places as Chambersburg, Pennsylvania, and Hagerstown, Mary- 
land. See also Lincoln to Lamon, June 25, infra. 



To Lorenzo Thomas 1 

If no good reason exists to the contrary I should like for Col. 
Hunter and Mr. Peck to be obliged in this matter. 

A. Lirsrcousr 

June 7, 1861 

1 ES, DNA WR RG 94, Adjutant General, Letters Received, 233-P-i86i. Lin- 
coln's endorsement is written in the left margin of David Hunter to Lorenzo 
Thomas, June 6, 1861, requesting appointment of "Lieut. "VV. "W. Peck, of the 
8th. Infantry ... in the 3d. U.S. Cavalry." William W. Peck, son of Ebenezer 
Peck of Chicago, was not transferred to Hunter's regiment, but was promoted to 
captain in the Eleventh Infantry, as of May 14, 1861. See Lincoln to Lorenzo 
Thomas, June 19, infra. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War. Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir June 8. 1861 

Hon. Emerson Etheridge 2 is now with me; and from the infor- 
mation he gives me I am induced to request that you send one 
thousand stand of Arms to Gen. Prentiss 3 at Cairo, to he delivered 
by him to such person or persons as he, Mr. Etheredge shall 
direct. Give Mr. Etheridge an interview, and he will fully explain 
to you. Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

[395] 



JTUINTE 8, l86l 

1 AILS, IHi. 

2 Emerson Etheridge of Dresden, Tennessee, ex-congressman (1853-1857, 
1859-1861), became clerk of the House of Representatives (July 4, i86i-Decem- 
ber 8, 1863). 3 Brigadier General Benjamin M. Prentiss. 



Endorsement: James Cooper to Lincoln 1 

June 8, 1861 

I can only say that If the War Department can receive this Regi- 
ment, I have no objection. I can not take upon my self personally 
the charge of providing them. A. LnNrcoLisr 

June 8, 1861 

1 AES, RJPB. Lincoln's endorsement is on the envelope of Brigadier General 
Cooper's letter, Camp Carroll, Maryland, June 7, 1861, asking Lincoln's inter- 
vention with the War Department to secure acceptance of the Second Maryland 
Regiment, raised by Captain J. P. Creager without proper authority from the 
War Department. Below Lincoln's endorsement Montgomery Blair wrote, "I 
can not understand why there shd be any trouble. The War Dept has called for 
volunteers from Md for the war & those proposed do not exceed the number called 
for as I understand it." Some of the companies of the Second Maryland Regiment 
were accepted in June and the rest in September, 1861. 



Endorsement: James Cooper to Lincoln 1 

I am sorry Mr. Cooper did not tell us ivhere the Regiment is, 
named within; but still I think it ought to be received. 
June 8, 1861 A. 



1 AES, The Rosenbach Company, Philadelphia and New York. This endorse- 
ment, or note, probably accompanied the endorsement supra, but became sep- 
arated from the letter of James Cooper. 



Memorandum : 
Appointment of Christopher Robinson 1 

[c. June 8, 1861] 

Mr. Senator Simmons, insists that Hon Christopher Robinson of 
R.I must have something out of the remaining Diplomatic & Con- 
sular appointments, and I think Rhode Island should be remem- 
bered on that occasion. 
Thinks of Chili 

1 AD, DLC-RTL. Lincoln appointed Robinson envoy pro tern., to Peru on June 
8 during the Senate recess, and the appointment was confirmed July 15, 1861. 

[396] 



To William H. Seward 1 

Hon. Sec. of State Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir June 8. 1861 

Mr. Wm. W. Richmond whose papers are inclosed within, is 
very anxious to be Consul to Paris. You know I expect you to name 
the man for that Consulate. You see he has a note from H. J. Ray- 
mond. Give him an interview. Yours truly A. 



1 ALS, NAuE. For the confusion of the appointment of William W. Rich- 
mond of New Orleans with that of William B. Richmond of Memphis, see 
Lincoln's memoranda c. April i, supra, and August 25, infra, and also Lincoln 
to Seward, August 7, infra. 

To William H. Seward 1 

Hon. Sec. of State Executive Mansion 

May I>c] dear Sir: June 8. 1861 

Some days ago, at my request, Mr. Hunter 2 sent a list of the 
then unfilled diplomatic appointments. 

They were, Japan, China, Costa-Rica, Honduras, Venezuela, 
Paragua. Comr, Chili & Peru. 

Japan, I understand, is not to be changed. China, suppose we 
hold open for Rurlingame, if we have to send a different man 3 to 
Austria. Chili we have since given to Nelson. 4 This leaves open to 
be disposed of now, so far as I see, Costa-Rica, Honduras, Venezue- 
la, Paragua, Peru, and Constantinople, the latter made vacant by 
the transfer of Gen. Webb 5 to Rrazil. 

1 AX, NAuE. 

2 William Hunter, chief clerk in the State Department. 

3 Anson Burlingame, who was not acceptable to the Austrian government. 

4 Thomas H. Nelson of Indiana. 

5 James W. Webb. The vacancies were filled as follows: Costa Bica, Charles N. 
Blotte of Texas; Honduras, Hezekiah G. Wells of Michigan; Venezuela, Henry T. 
Blow of Missouri; Paraguay, Charles A. Washburne of California; Peru, Christo- 
pher Bobinson of Bhode Island; Constantinople, Edward J. Morris of Pennsyl- 



To Gideon Welles 1 

June 8, 1861 

Herewith is a letter of Col. Fremont which contains some infor- 
mation I suppose your Department ought to have. Yours very truly 

A. 



1 Stan. V. Henkels Catalog 1342, January 4, 1924, No. 480. Fremont was in 
London at the time and wrote to Francis P. Blair, Sr., May 24, 1861, about the 
purchase of Avar steamers by representatives of the Confederacy (Allan Nevins, 
Fremont^ Pathmarker of the West, p. 475). 

[397] 



Endorsement : 
William Nelson to William H. Seward 1 

[June g? 1861] 

The suggestions within made are approved. Let directions be given 
accordingly. A. LiisrcoLrsr. 

1 OR, I, III, I, 161. Lieutenant William Nelson, U.S. Navy, in charge of 
gunboats on the Ohio, wrote to Seward from New York, June 9, 1861, enclosing 
a letter received from Mr. Larz Anderson of Cincinnati in which Anderson de- 
precated the unit known as the Kentucky Brigade, organized at Cincinnati. 
". . . They are not Kentuckians, but an organization gotten up in order that 
its officers might be mustered into the service. ... To send these men to Louis- 
ville will do the Union cause a most serious injury. . . . May I ask you to have 
this order reconsidered." Lieutenant Nelson was appointed brigadier general of 
volunteers in September, 1861. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir June 10, 1861 

If there is any vacancy of a cadetship, for West-Point, which. I 
have to fill, please give it to James M. Marshall, son of Hon. T. A. 
Marshall, of Illinois. Yours truly A. LiisrcoLiNr 

3-ALS, DNA WR RG 94, U.S. Military Academy, 1861, No. 569, Box 79. 
Thomas A. Marshall wrote Lincoln, April 14 and May 16, 1861, asking the ap- 
pointment for his son, and incidentally a brigadier generalship for himself (DLC- 
RTL) . James M. Marshall was in the fourth class at West Point as of September 
30, 1861. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir June 10- 1861 

Please let Col. Montgomery C. Meigs be appointed Quarter- 
Master-General. Yours very truly A. LIN-COUNT 

1 ALS, owned by Charles W. Olsen, Chicago, Illinois. Concerning Meigs' ap- 
pointment, see Lincoln's letter to Winfield Scott, June 5, supra. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir June 10, 1861 

I am sure that I some time ago, recommended Mr. William Pat- 
ten, a Lieut, in the N. Y. jth. to be a Paymaster in the Army; and 

[398] 



JTUINTE 1 O, l86l 

I still wish him to be remembered, according to the date of that 
recommendation. Yours truly A. Lirsrcoi-N' 

1 ALS-P, ISLA. William Patten was appointed additional paymaster, June i. 
1861. 



To John A. Dahlgren 1 

Capt. Dahlgren, Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir June 10. 1861 

You have seen Mr. Blunt's new gun. "What think you of it? 
Would the Government do well to purchase some of them? Should 
they be of the size of the one exhibited? or of different sizes? Yours 
truly A. 



1 ALS, ORB. On the envelope Lincoln wrote "Will Capt. Dahlgren please see 
Mr. Blunt?" See also Lincoln's endorsement, infra. Orison Blunt was a leading 
New York Republican associated with J. G. Syms in the manufacture of guns. In 
1862 Blunt made for the U.S. Government a small lot of Enfield pattern rifles, 
which may be the gun referred to by Lincoln. See Stephen Van Rensselaer, Amer- 
ican Firearms (1947), and Claud E. Fuller and Richard D. Stewart, Firearms 
of the Confederacy (1944). 



Endorsement: John A. Dahlgren to Lincoln 1 

I saw this gun ray self, and witnessed some experiraents with it; 
and I really think it worthy the attention of the Government. 
June 10, 1861 A. 



1 AES, owned by Wilson F. Harwood, Washington, D.C. Lincoln's endorse- 
ment is on the back of Dahlgren's reply to Lincoln's letter of June 10, supra, "I 
have seen Mr Blunt's Gun and was much pleased with it. I think we should have 
some of them . . . for the present emergency it would be well to adhere to the 
dimension now constructed." 



Endorsement : 
Appointment of James B. M. Potter 1 

Respectfully referred to the Secretary of War for his consider- 
ation. A. LIISTCOUNT 
June 10, 1861. 

1 AES, RPB. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of Governor Wil- 
liam Sprague to Lincoln, June 8, requesting appointment of "my friend General 
James B. M. Potter" as paymaster in the Regular Army. See Lincoln to Cameron 
June 11, infra 9 for further developments. 

[399] 



To George B. McClellan 1 

Maj. Gen. McClellan Washington, Dec. [szc] 

My dear Sir June 10. 1861 

My friends, Hon. T. A. Marshall, and Hon. A. W. Mack, the 
bearers of this, I presume are not wholly unknown to you. They 
are two of our Illinois State Senators, residing respectively at Coles 
& ELankakee counties. They came here as the representatives of a 
Company, including themselves, seeking a contract, or contracts, 
for furnishing provisions for the Army. Fnding that officers of the 
proper Departments are with you for supplying the West, they 
now propose to call on you, and them, for the same object. I can 
do no more than to give assurance that any contract made with 
them would be faithfully complied with on their part; and that I 
hope they may obtain some such, on fair and just terms to the 
government and themselves. They are my friends whom I would 
be pleased to see obliged. Yours very truly A. LINCOLN 

* ALS, DLC-McClellan Papers. Thomas A. Marshall wrote Lincoln, June 16, 
1861, "I fear . . . we will fail in accomplishing any thing in the way of a con- 
tract. May I not then ask yon ... to make me a brigadier. . . ." (DLC-B.TL). 
Alonzo W. Mack was a banker at Kankakee, Illinois. 



Order for Issue of Bonds for Use 
of Delaware Indians 1 

June 10, 1861 

Whereas, by the treaty of Saxcoxieville, amended by the United 
States Senate, and finally ratified by the President of the United 
States on the 22nd. day of August, 1860 a principal object of both 
parties was the construction of a certain contemplated Railroad 
therein named; and, to that end, the Leavenworth, Pawnee, and 
Western Railroad Company were to pay into the United States 
Treasury, in gold or silver coin, a sum of money afterwards ascer- 
tained to be $286,742.15 as the appraised value of certain lands in 
Kansas belonging to the Delaware tribe of Indians, which sum of 
money, after expending a sufficient part of it to enable the Indians 
to commence agricultural pursuits under favorable circumstances, 
was to be, by the President, for said Indians, invested in safe, and 
profitable stocks. And whereas the said Railroad Company is not 
able to pay said sum of money within time, according to said 
treaty; and whereas the President is of opinion that it is not for 
the interest of either party that said object of the treaty shall fail; 

[400] 



JUNE, 10, l86l 

but not knowing what -would be the desire of said Indians on this 
point; nor knowing whether any part of said sum -would be needed 
to enable the Indians to commence agricultural pursuits under 
favorable circumstances, but supposing it probable that no part of 
it would be so needed, as said Indians now have over fifty thousand 
dollars lying idle in the United States Treasury, therefore 

It is directed by the President that said Railroad Company, may 
execute their Bonds, with interest- warrants, or coupons attached, 
according to the forms hereto annexed, the principal of which 
Bonds shall amount to the aggregate sum of $286,742.15 and de- 
posite the same with Archibald Williams of Kansas, hereby ap- 
pointed to receive and receipt for the same, to be by him trans- 
mitted to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs for the use of said 
Indians; and also shall, in due and proper form, execute, a mort- 
gage upon one hundred thousand acres of the land contemplated in, 
and by said treaty, to aid in the construction of said Railroad, the 
said one hundred thousand acres to be the lands designated in 
the letter of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs to the Secretary 
of the Interior, dated May agth. 1861. 

Said mortgage to be conditioned for the full payment of said 
Bonds, both as to interest and principal, and that on any failure to 
pay either when due, all right and interest of said Railroad Com- 
pany in and to said mortgaged land, and also to all such of said 
land not mortgaged, as shall not at that time, be earned and pa- 
tented, according to said treaty, shall be forfeited, and said land 
again become the absolute property of the United States in trust 
for said Indians; and said mortgaged lands to be in no event 
patented to said until said Bonds, principal and interest shall be 
fully paid. And upon said Bonds being so made and deposited, and 
said mortgage being so executed, and duly recorded in Leavenworth 
county, Kansas, all matters, so far as not necessarily varied by this 
arrangement, shall proceed in conformity to said treaty, as if the 
money had been paid by said Railroad Company, and had been in- 
vested by the President in said Railroad Bonds. Provided always 
that this arrangement shall be of no effect, until Archibald Wil- 
liams, Judge of the United States Court for the District of Kansas, 
shall have indorsed a certificate upon this paper, that he has care- 
fully examined the same, and also the Bonds and mortgage offered 
in compliance with its provisions], and has found that Bonds, 
and mortgage do in fact, comply with, and fulfil said provisions; 
and also that he has had before him, the chiefs and head men 
named in said treaty, as John Connor, Sax-cox-ie, Ne-con-he-con, 
and Rock-a-to-wha, and has fully explained to them the nature and 

[401] 



JTUINTE 11, l86l 

effect of this departure from the terms of said treaty, and that they 
freely assented to the same. ABRAHAM LINCOLN. 

June 10. 1861. 

IADS, DNA FS RG 11, General Records of the U.S. Government, No. 317, 
"Treaty with the Delawares at Leavenworth City, Kansas, July 2, 1861." The or- 
der as reproduced is entirely in Lincoln's handwriting, and his endorsement "Ap- 
proved, as forms, June. 10. 1861. A. Lincoln" appears on the accompanying forms 
of bonds and interest warrants. See Lincoln to the Senate, July 19, infra. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Washington, June 11. 1861. 

The Government has already accepted ten Regiments from the 
State of Indiana. I think at least six more ought to be received from 
that state. Two to be those of Col. James W. McMillan & Col. Wil- 
liam L. Brown, and the other four to be designated by the Governor 
of the State of Indiana; and to be received into the volunteer serv- 
ice of the U.S. according to the "Plan of organization," in the 
General Order of the War Department No. 15 when they re- 
port to Major General McClellan, in condition to pass muster ac- 
cording to that Order. And, with the approval of the Secretary of 
War to be indorsed hereon, and a copy left in his Department, I 
direct that the whole six, or any small number of said Regiments 
be received. A. LINCOLN. 

1 AL.S, RPB. On the same day Cameron communicated to Governor Oliver P. 
Morton, Lincoln's call for six additional regiments, two of them commanded by 
Colonel William L. Brown and Colonel James W. McMillin (OR, III, I, 265). 
Morton to Lincoln, June 19, 1861, protested Lincoln's appointment of colonels: 
"Without intending to cast any reflections upon the character or fitness of the 
men appointed, I beg leave to state that I know of no reason making it necessary 
to take the appointing power from, the Executive of the State. . . ." (DLC-RTL). 
Cameron to Morton, June 23, assured the governor that he regretted the em- 
barrassment, "... nothing could have been further from the intention of the 
President or of this Department. . . ." (OR, III, I, 291). 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War. Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir June 11. 1861 

Do please give these Pennsylvania friends of yours a chance for 
One Regiment. Say to them, as has been said to some others "Pre- 
sent your Regiment in working form, and it will be received." 
Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, DLC-Cameron Papers. 

[402] 



To Simon Cameron 1 

June 11, 1861 

I have just inclosed to you the recommendation of Gov. Sprague 
that Gen. James B. M. Potter, be appointed a Paymaster. Immedi- 
ately afterwards, the Paymaster General called, protesting, as I 
wrote you, against all these appointments "being made from civil 
life. He said, however, there will be a large number of these ap- 
pointments, to be made for the volunteers. Can we not fill the first 
two from the Regular Army, & then give Gen. Potter a chance? 
We owe Rhode-Island and Gov. Sprague, a good deal, because they 
give us such good troops, and no trouble. 

June. 11. 1861 A. 



1 AES, RPB. Lincoln's endorsement is written on one side of a scrap of paper, 
the other side of which bears Lincoln's note of March 27, 1862, infra, concerning 
Potter's transfer to the Regular Army. Potter was appointed additional paymaster 
of Volunteers, June i, 1861, and on July 15, 1864, was appointed major and 
paymaster in the Regular Army. 

To William E Dole 1 

Hon. W. E Dole Executive Mansion 

Comr. of Ind. Affrs. June [c.n], 1861 

My dear Sir Some time ago I directed you to designate a suit- 
able person to be Superintendent of Indian Affairs in Washington 
Territory, saying I -would appoint the person you would so desig- 
nate. You designated Anson Dart; and I now have the following 
reasons for not appointing him all coming to my knowledge since 
I gave you the direction mentioned. 

ist. A member of the present Cabinet tells me that during 
Genl. Taylor's administration Dart distinctly tendered money to 
him for his influence to get an office from Gen. Taylor. 

2nd. A member of the present BLR. from Wisconsin writes me 
over his own name that Dart is an immoral and dishonest man; 
and that if nominated, he will go before the Senate and procure 
his rejection if possible. 

3rd, One of the Senators from Oregon tells me that Dart's char- 
acter is very bad in that county; that he is universally understood 
out there to have left his family at home, and kept a prostitute 
while there; and that, if nominated, he will, in the Senate, procure 
his rejection if possible. 

4th. The other Senator from Oregon tells me Dart's character 
is very odious and bad in that county; and that Dart, last winter, 
distinctly proposed to him that if he would procure his appoint- 

[403] 



JTUDNTE 11, l86l 

ment to the Oregon Indian Superintendency, he would give him a 
thousand dollars the day the appointment should be made, and five 
hundred a year, as long as he should hold the office. 

I presume you knew nothing of these things; and that neither 
you or I could knowingly be for such a man. Yours truly 

A. 



1 ALS copy or draft, DL.C-RTL,. The date of this letter must have been on or 
after June 11, for Lincoln refers to the letter from Representative John F. Potter, 
June 1 1, 1861, maintaining that Anson Dart of Wisconsin, former superintendent 
of Indian affairs in Oregon (1850-1853) ". . . is in every way unfit for that or 
any other position. . . . And if his appointment shall be made, I will go before 
the Senate and there protest. . . ." (DLC-RTL). See Lincoln to Winfield Scott, 
["May 29] , suprciy and note concerning the appointment of Bion F. Kendall. 

To Henry W. Hoffman 1 

Collector at Baltimore Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: June 11. 1861 

Can you not give Mr. Balloch 2 the Inspectorship he desires? I 
shall be obliged if you will. Yours truly A. LmcoiJN- 

1 ALS, DLM. 2 "Mr. Balloch" has not been identified. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

June 12, 1861 

With the concurrence of the Secretary of War, and also of the 
Governor of Massachusetts, with the evidence of the latter the 
same is in ready condition to move, I direct that the Regiment 
within mentioned, be mustered into the service of the "United States. 
June 12. 1861. A. LIINTCOUJNT 

1 AES, IHi. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of a letter from Ro- 
man Catholic Bishop John B. Fitzpatrick of Boston, June 11, 1861, recommending 
that the Fourteenth Massachusetts, a regiment composed largely of Irish, be ac- 
cepted by the government. Cameron's endorsement below Lincoln's is as follows* 
"I approve this order on the condition that this regiment appear at Harrisburg 
Penna ... in ten days from tomorrow." The regiment was mustered in July 5, 
1861, and later became the First Massachusetts Heavy Artillery. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

June 12, 1861 

I think Joseph J. Reynolds, of Indiana, ought to be a Brigadier 
General, and, perhaps, the thing done at once. He is a West-Point 
man, and is well recommended, particularly by the Governor of 
Indiana. A. LmcoLisr 

June 12, 1861. 

[404] 



13., 1861 

1 AES, DLC. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of a letter from 
Governor Oliver P. Morton to Lincoln, June 9, 1861, authorizing the bearer, 
*'Hon, A. S. White ... to ask the appointment of Gen Joseph J, Reynolds as 
Brig General. ... I have already in two despatches asked for his appointment 
but have received no answer. . . ." Joseph J. Reynolds 5 appointment, dating 
from May 17, was submitted to the Senate July 29, and confirmed August 5, 
1861. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: June 12, 1861 

Hon. John Van Dyke, Hon. W. A. Newell, and Hon Courtlandt 
Parker, all of New- Jersey, now present, ask that Moses F Webb, 
of their State be made a Pay-Master in the Army. This is a good 
recommendation; and I think N.J. is entitled to that much. Yours 
truly A. LINCOLN. 

i ALS, DNA WR RG 107, Secretary of War, Personnel Appointments, Box 6. 
The recommendation of ISTew Jersey congressman "William A. Newell, Newark 
attorney Courtland Parker, and Judge John Van Dyke of the New Jersey Su- 
preme Court was followed, Moses F. Webb being appointed additional pay- 
master, August 5, 1861. Lincoln's letter is accompanied by an undated letter 
from Senator Edward D. Baker to Cameron, making the same recommendation. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Secretary of War. Executive Mansion, June 13, 1861. 

My dear Sir: I think it is entirely safe to accept a fifth regiment 
from Michigan, and with your approbation I should say a regiment 
presented by Col. T. B. W. Stockton, ready for service within two 
weeks from now, will be received. Look at Colonel Stockton's tes- 
timonials. Yours truly, A. LUN-CQLJNT. 

i OR, III, I, 269. Colonel Thomas B. "W. Stockton's Sixteenth Michigan Vol- 
unteers were accepted and left Detroit for Washington on September 16, 1861. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Secretary of War: Executive Mansion, June 13, 1861. 

My dear Sir. There is, it seems, a regiment in Massachusetts 
commanded by Fletcher Webster, and which Hon. Daniel Web- 
ster's old friends very much wish to get into the service. If it can 
be received with the approval of your Department and the consent 
of the Governor of Massachusetts I shall indeed be much gratified. 
Give Mr. Ashmun a chance to explain fully. Yours truly, 

A. 



1 OR, III, I, 269. Colonel Fletcher Webster's Twelfth. Massachusetts Regiment 
was mustered into federal service June 26, 861. 

[405] 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War June 13, 1861 

Please say to Col. A. T. McReynolds, that when he will present 
the Cavalry Regiment according to the within authority they will 
be received under him as they would have been under Carl Schurz. 
June 13, 1861 A. LINCOLN 

1 Copy, ISLA. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of Schurz to Major 
Andrew T. McReynolds, June 5, 1861, requesting McReynolds to take command 
of the First New York Cavalry. Schurz wrote, "Being ordered "by the President to 
leave for my diplomatic post at Madrid I am obliged to dissolve my connection 
with the Cavalry-Regiment. ... I would invite you to see the authorities at 
Washington . . . inducing them to ratify this transfer of authority." 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War: Executive Mansion 

Dear Sir June 13, 1861 

You intimated to me, as I remember, some doubt of Col. Hiker's 
Regiment of Anderson Zouaves being a reality. Col. Baker 2 assures 
me that he personally knows it is a reality; and being so, with the 
consent of the Governor of New- York, I desire that it be received. 
Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

1 AL.S, IHi. Colonel John L. Hiker's regiment, designated the Sixty-second 
New York Infantry was mustered into federal service June 30- July i, 1861. 

2 Probably Senator Edward D. Baker of Oregon, who was made a brigadier 
general of Volunteers in July, with appointment dating from May 17. 



To Caleb B. Smith 1 

Hon. Sec. of Interior Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: June 13. 1861 

CoL Baker was 'with, me yesterday; and herewith I return you 
his list for Oregon appointments. 2 Please make out and send me 
Commissions according to it. You see at the foot of the list on the 
back of the paper he has added one in his own hand writing. Put it 
in with the rest. Yours truly A. LIISTCOLIN' 

1 ALS, DNA NR KG 48, Applications, Indian Agencies, etc., Oregon, Box 
1267. 

2 Senator Edward D. Baker's accompanying list, under date of April 8, 1861, 
is as follows: B. J. Pengra, surveyor general; William T. Matlock, receiver at 
Oregon City; William A. Starkweather, register at Oregon City; John Kelly, 

[406] 



JUNE 15, l86l 

register at Roseburg; George E. Briggs, receiver at Roseburg; William H. Rec- 
tor, superintendent of Indian affairs; William H. Barnhart, William Logan, and 
Charles Hutchins, Indian agents. The appointments were made as listed. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir June 14. 1861 

Let Hon. John A. Dix be a Major General of Volunteers. Let Cap- 
tain John Pope of the U.S.A. and Hon. Stephen A. Hurlbut of Ills, 
each be a Brigadier General, of (Illinois) volunteers. I understand 
Gen. Scott wishes an officer now in the Army by the name of 
[blank] Rosencrantz, 2 to be a Brigadier General in the new Regu- 
lar Army; and if so, let it be done. Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, DNA WR RG 94, Adjutant General, Letters Received, 222-P. 

2 "William S. Rosecrans" is written on the bottom of the letter in a different 
hand. Rosecrans* appointment was made dating back to May 16, 1861. 

Memorandum: Appointment of John Pope 
and Stephen A. Hurlbut 1 

My direction to have Pope & Hurlbut appointed Brigadier Generals 
seems to have been in point, so far as relates to the within. 

June 14, 1861 A. LiircoLTsr 

1 AES, DLC-Cameron Papers. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back 
of a telegram received from Governor Richard Yates of Illinois, June 14, 1861: 
"It is certainly the design of the secessionists of Missouri to attempt the imme- 
diate expulsion of the federal troops from that state This renders the appoint- 
ment of the superior officers m this state a necessity." 

To Salmon E Chase 1 

June 15, 1861 
To the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States: 

You will please issue a Warrant to Wm. H Carryl and Brother 
for the sum of Seven Thousand Five Hundred dollars for the pur- 
pose of furnishing the President's House, in accordance with the act 
of Feb. 20. 1861. ABRAHAM LINCOLN, 

Executive Mansion 
June 15. 1861 

1 LS, DNA RG 217, General Accounting Office. The letter accompanied a bill 
rendered by "Wm. H, Carryl & Bro.," May 29, 1861, in the amount of $7,500, 
for furnishings for the Executive Mansion, which Lincoln approved and re- 
ferred to Chase on June 17. 

[407] 



Endorsement: John A. Andre w 
to Hiram Walbridge 1 

With, the concurrence of the Secretary of War, let the ten Regi- 
ments named within be called for and accepted. 

June 15, 1861. A. 



1 AES, DLC-Cameron Papers. Governor Andrew wrote General Walbridge, 
June 12, 1861, ". . . if you can procure in addition to the last requisition 
upon this state for six regiments ... a further requisition for ten Regiments 
thoroughly armed, equipped, clothed, and provided with tents, baggage train, 
rations, and subsistence stores these advances will be made by this state . . . 
within forty days from the reception of the order here. . . ." Cameron to Wal- 
bridge, June 17, 1861, instructed Walbridge to ". . . advise Governor Andrew 
that the necessary requisition will immediately be made. . . ." (OR, III, I, 275.) 



Endorsement: Charles H. Farrell 
to Simon E Hanscom 1 

If this Regiment is such as represented within, I think it ought to 
be accepted. A. LiisrcoijNr 

June 15, 1861 

*AES, The Rosenbach Company, Philadelphia and New York. Charles H. 
Farrell of the New York Herald wrote Simon P. Hanscom of the Washington 
National Republican, June 12, 1861, recommending that "Colonel Joachim 
Maidof the commandant of the Eleventh Regiment, (Washington Rifles) New 
York State Troops" and his regiment be accepted for the period of six months. 
The Eleventh New York was not mustered into federal service until June, 1862. 



To Edward Bates 1 

Hon. Attorney General Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: June 17. 1861. 

You remember Allen A. Burton was appointed an Associate Jus- 
tice of the Supreme Court of Dakota Ty. Since then I have given 
him a different place; and the judgeship of course becomes vacant. 
I now will thank you if you will send me a Commission for Joseph 
L. Williams, of Tenn. to fill the vacancy in said Associate Judge- 
ship in Dakota Territory. Yours very truly A. Lirroousr 

1ALS, DNA GE RG 60, Papers of Attorney General, Segregated Lincoln 
Material. Allen A. Burton of Lancaster, Kentucky, was appointed minister to 
New Granada, and Joseph L, Williams, ex-congressman (1837-1843) of Knox- 
ville, Tennessee, received the Dakota judgeship. 

[408] 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir June 17. 1861 

After examining the list presented for Officers of the Addition to 
the Regular Army, I deem it a little unfortunate, that they are 
drawn from the different States in such unequal proportions, a 
single State furnishing nearly one fourth of the whole; still I think 
we have not time now to break up and reconstruct the card. The 
few modifications I desire to make are as follows: 

ist. Let Col. Robert Anderson be appointed a Brigadier General; 
and Col. William H. Emory take his place on the card, as Colonel 
of the 15th Regiment of Infantry. 2 

2nd. I wish Oliver L. Shepherd, now Captain in the 3rd Infantry, 
and Major by brevet, to be a Lieutenant Colonel, you to find the 
place for him. 3 

3rd. I wish Abner Doubleday, now a Captain in the ist Artillery, 
to be a Major in the similar corps if possible, you to find a place 
for him. 4 

4th. I wish Adam J. Slemmer now a first Lieutenant in same 
Regiment last mentioned, to be a Major in a similar corps, if pos- 
sible, you to find a place for him. 5 

5th. If he desires it, I would also like for Capt. Theodore Talbot, 
who escorted my messenger to Gov. Pickens last April, to be a 
Major. 6 

6th. Because of his relationship to the late Senator Douglas, I 
wish James Madison Cutts, Jr. to be a Captain in some part of this 
new- corps. 7 

/th. At the very urgent solicitation of Hon Mr. Van Wyck, I 
wish Horatio B. Reed to be a Second Lieutenant in this new corps. 8 

8th. I also wish Francis E. Brownell, who stood by Col. Ellsworth 
at his death, to be a Second Lieutenant in this corps. 9 Yours truly 

A. LINCOLN 

1 Angle, p. 277; ALS-F, ISLA (first page only). The list of Regular Army 
promotions went to the Senate July 31, 1861, the date of appointment being 
designated as May 14, 1861. 

2 Lieutenant Colonel William H, Emory was appointed lieutenant colonel of 
the Third Cavalry, Brevet Major Fitz-John Porter, receiving the colonelcy of 
the Fifteenth Infantry. 

3 Oliver L. Shepherd was appointed lieutenant colonel of the Eighteenth In- 
fantry. 

4 Abner Doubleday was appointed major of the Seventeenth Infantry. 

5 Adam J. Slemmer was appointed major, May 14. 

6 Theodore Talbot was promoted to major, August 3, 1861. 

7 James M. Cutts, Jr., brother-in-law of Stephen A. Douglas, was appointed cap- 
tain in the Eleventh Infantry. 

[409] 



jr u IN" E 17, 1861 

8 Horatio B. Reed was appointed second lieutenant in the Fifth Artillery. 
Representative Charles H. Van Wyck of New York was his sponsor. 

9 Francis E. Brownell was appointed second lieutenant in the Eleventh In- 
fantry. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

June 17, 1861 

I will thank the Secretary of War, if he will have us furnished, the 
"Navy-revolvers and Sabre" as desired within, so that Mrs. L. can 
send them with her compliments. Mr. Fry is an acquaintance of 
hers, and a good & brave man. A. LINCOLN 

June 17, 1861. 

1 AES, IHi. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of an extract copied 
from "a letter from John Fry of Boyle County Kentucky." Fry expected ". . . to 
take command of the Company. ... It is impossible to procure here., such ac- 
coutrements as are necessary, and I should like to get a pair of Navy size re- 
volvers, and a sabre. . . ." 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir June 17, 1861 

With your concurrence, and that of the Governor of Indiana, I 
am in favor of accepting into what we call the three years service, 
any number not exceeding four additional Regiments, from that 
State. Probably they should come from the triangular region be- 
tween the Ohio & Wabash rivers, including my own old boyhood 
home. 

Please see Hon. C. M. Allen, Speaker of the la. 2 H.R. and unless 
you perceive good reason to the contrary, make up an order for 
him according to the above. Yours truly A. LUNTCOUNT 

1 AL.S, InHi-Mitten Collection. Cameron to Oliver P. Morton, June 19, 1861, 
notified the governor of the War Department's willingness to accept the addi- 
tional regiments (OR, III, I, 279). 2 Lincoln's abbreviation for Indiana. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion June 17. 1861 

My dear Sir With your concurrence, and that of the Governor 
of Ohio, I am in favor of receiving into what we call the three years 
service, any number not exceeding six additional Regiments from 
that State. Unless you perceive good reason to the contrary, please 
see Hon. John A. Gurley, who bears this, and make an order cor- 
responding with the above. Yours truly A. 

[410] 



JTUPsTB l8, l86l 

1 ALS, owned by Roy G Fitzgerald, Dayton, Ohio. 

2 Representative John A. Gurley of Cincinnati. Cameron's order has not been 
located. 

To Gideon Welles 1 

Hon. Sec. of Navy Executive Mansion June 17. 1861* 

My dear Sir- Gen. Rousseau, introduces to me Charles E. Ander- 
son, whom he wishes to have appointed a Paymaster in the Navy. 
As I have no doubt of his fitness for the place, and as the appoint- 
ment would be a Kentucky appointment, I think it ought to be 
made so soon as it consistently can. Yours truly A. Li3srcoLi>T. 

1 ALS, CSmH. Lovell H. Rousseau of Louisville, brigadier general of the Ken- 
tucky Home Guards, was appointed brigadier general of Volunteers, October i, 
1861, but there is no record of a Navy appointment for Anderson. 

To Richard Yates 1 

Gov. R. Yates Washington, 

Springfield, Ills June 17, 1861 

The President has raised no one from a Captain to a General in 
the Regular Army; and the Officers o the Army are not willing 
that he should. Capt. Pope's own letter asking to be a Brigadier 
General of Volunteers is now before me. 

1 ADf, DLC-RTL. The draft was apparently of a telegram. John Pope to Lin- 
coln, June 16, 1861, has a postscript dated June 17, as follows: "Gov. Yates has 
just shown me your despatch stating that you had not appointed any Capt. to 
General McDowell was only a brevet major. . . . Meigs . . . was Captain of 
Engineers. I applied for appointment of General of Volunteers for ... it 
seemed certain that I could not help having my juniors in rank from Pennsyl- 
vania appointed over my head. . . . Col Stone, Col Franklin & Col Porter are 
all my juniors. . . ." (DLC-RTL). A telegram signed hy Jesse K. DuBois, 
William Butler, and Ozias M. Hatch, June 16, used peremptory language, "ex- 
pect & demand" that Pope's promotion be in the Regular Army, and a further 
telegram from them signed also by Richard Yates, June 17, said we **..., in- 
sist upon his appointment without regard to army prejudices. . . .** (DLC-RTL). 
Pope's appointment remained as brigadier general of Volunteers. 

To Winfield Scott 1 

June 18, 1861 

I wish to oblige Mr. Attorney General Bates in the matter men- 
tioned within, and will do so upon the conditions that Lieut. Gen- 
eral Scott shall be of opinion I have the lawful power, and that 
there will be no military impropriety in it. "Will Gen. Scott please 
say? A. Li3srcoosr 

June 18. 1861 

[411] 



JTU3NTE 8, l86l 

1 AES, MoSHi. Edward Bates wrote June 17, 1861, asking that James B. Eads 
of St. Louis be appointed commissary of subsistence upon request of Brigadier 
General Nathaniel Lyon. There is no reply from Scott or record of the famous 
engineer's appointment to commissioned service, but he was soon to be called 
upon to design and build armor-plated gunboats for the army's use on the 
Mississippi. 

To Gideon Welles 1 

Hon. Sec. of Navy Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir June 18. 1861 

This will introduce Mr. H. D. Stover who wishes a short talk 
with you about gun-boats. Please give him a hearing. Yours truly 

A. 
, PHi. Stover was a contractor at Philadelphia. 



To Ninian W. Edwards 1 

Hon. N. W. Edwards Washington D.C. June 19, 1861 

My dear Sir: It pains me to hear you speak of being ruined in 
your pecuniary affairs. I still hope you are injured only, and not 
ruined. 2 "When you wrote me some time ago in reference to looking 
up something in the Departments here, I thought I would inquire 
into the thing and write you, but the extraordinary pressure upon 
me diverted me from it, and soon it passed out o my mind. The 
thing you proposed, it seemed to me, I ought to understand myself 
before it was set on foot by my direction or permission; and I 
really had no time to make myself acquainted with it. Nor have I 
yet. And yet I am unwilling, of course, that you should be deprived 
of a chance to make something, if it can be done "without injustice 
to the Government, or to any individual. If you choose to come here 
and point out to me how this can be done, I shall not only not ob- 
ject, but shall be gratified to be able to oblige you. Your friend as 
ever A. 



1 ALS, ICHi. There are no letters from Edwards in the Lincoln Papers which 
seem related to his request for aid in the form of an appointment, but an undated 
letter of Orville H. Browning to Edwards (probably August, 1861) promises 
to see the president and demand a place for him: "If you were, as I supposed, rich, 
and able to help yourself ... I would not do this. . . ." (DLC-RTL) . Edwards 
was appointed captain and commissary of subsistence, August 8, 1861. 

2 The first two sentences have been crossed out on the manuscript. 

To Joseph K. F. Mansfield 1 

Gen. Mansfield Executive Mansion June 19, 1861 

My dear Sir: The inclosed papers of Col. Joseph Hooker speak 
for themselves. He desires to have the command of a Regiment. 

[412] 



JTUTsTE 2O, l86l 

Ought he to have it? and can it be done? and how? Please consult 
Gen. Scott, and say if he and you would like Col. Hooker to have 
a command. Yours very truly A. 



l ALS, DLC-RTL. General Mansfield to lincoln, June 19, 1861: "I should 
be highly gratified to see Col Hooker a Col in the Regular Army. , . . Yet in 
consultation with the Commanding General I find him unwilling to entertain 
the subject." (DLC-RTL). Joseph Hooker had been brevetted lieutenant colonel 
September 13, 1847, for bravery at Chapultepec, but resigned from the army in 
1853. At the end of the Mexican War, he incurred the enmity of Winfield 
Scott by giving testimony in favor of General Gideon J. Pillow before the court 
of inquiry investigating Pillow's disloyalty to Scott. Hooker had to be content 
with appointment as brigadier general of Volunteers, as of May 17, 1861. 

To Lorenzo Thomas 1 

Gen. Thomas. Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir, June 19. 1861 

Let William W. Peck 2 be made a ist. Lieutenant in Col Hunter's 
Regiment of Cavalry, as you and I talked this morning. 

Also let William A. Dubois, 3 of Ills, be made a 2nd. Lieut, as we 
spoke this morning. Yours truly A. LUNTCOLIST 

ES. If Mr. Peck can be made a Captain of Infantry, that is pre- 
ferred; but if that can not be done, let him be sure to be ist. Lieu- 
tenancy in Col. Hunter's Regiment. A. Liisr COLIN" 

PS. 2nd. If James Curtis, 4 of Illinois, can be made a ist. or 2 
Lieut, let it be done. He is a West Point cadet, and resigned some 
time ago. A. LiNGOLisr 

1 ALS-P, ISLA. 

2 See endorsement, Lincoln to Lorenzo Thomas, June 7, supra. 

3 William A. Dubois, son of Jesse K. Dubois, was a sergeant in the Seventh 
Illinois Infantry, mustered out July 25, 1861, and appointed August i a second 
lieutenant in the Regiment of Mounted Riflemen, later designated the Third 
Cavalry, of the Regular Army. 

4 James Curtis, West Point graduate in 1851, resigned as first lieutenant Jan- 
uary 15, 1857. He was appointed first lieutenant in the Fifteenth Infantry, Reg- 
ular Army, 

To Benjamin F. Butler 1 

Executive Mansion June aoth 1861. 

I hereby authorize Major General B. F. Butler, if in his discre- 
tion he shall deem it necessary and advisable, to appoint Rev. C. 
"W. Dennison a Chaplain of the Volunteer Hospital at Fortress 
Monroe, during such period of time and under such regulations as 
he shall prescribe. A. LrrrooiJNr 

1 LS, DLC-Butler Papers, Reverend Charles "W. Dennison was appointed 
hospital chaplain, "but not until July 31, 1862, is the appointment of record. 

[413] 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Secretary of War. Executive Mansion, June 20, 1861. 

My dear Sir: Since you spoke to me yesterday about General 
J. H. Lane, of Kansas, I have been reflecting upon the subject, and 
have concluded that we need the services of such a man out there 
at once; that we better appoint him a brigadier-general of volun- 
teers to-day, and send him off with such authority to raise a force 
(I think two regiments better than three, but as to this I am not 
particular) as you think will get him into actual work quickest. 
Tell him when he starts to put it through. Not to be writing or 
telegraphing back here, but put it through. Yours truly, 

A. LINCOLN. 

1 OR, III, I, 280-81; NH, VI, 294. Both sources give also, Cameron's endorse- 
ment. "General Lane has been authorized to raise two additional regiments of 
volunteers." Senator James H. Lane to Lincoln, June 20, 1861, requested per- 
mission to raise the two additional regiments "... in the existing neces- 
sity. . . ." (OR, III, I, 282). 



To Winfield Scott 1 

State Department, June 20, 1861. 
The Lieutenant-General 
Commanding the Armies of the United States: 

You or any officer you may designate will, in your discretion, 
suspend the writ of habeas corpus so far as may relate to Major 
Chase, lately o the Engineer Corps of the Army of the United 
States, now alleged to be guilty of treasonable practices against 
this government. ABRAHAM LINCOLN. 

By the President: 

WILLIAM H. SEWARD. 

1 OR, II, II, 193; James D. Richardson, A Compilation of the Messages and 
Papers of the Presidents, 1789-1897 (Published by Authority of Congress, 1900), 
VI, 19. Although the Official Records prints this order Tinder date of January 
20, 1862, as addressed to "Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan, Commanding Armies 
of the United States," there seems to be little doubt that the order was issued 
June 20, 1861, as printed by Richardson. The original is missing from the Na- 
tional Archives, but the register of letters received by the adjutant general, lists 
it under date of June 20, 1861 (DNA WR RG 94, 875-?), and the original has 
been cataloged for sale at auction under the date of June 20, 1861 (American 
Art Association Anderson Galleries, Sale 3995, November 10, 1932, No. 61). 
Major William Henry Chase resigned from the U.S. Army, October 31, 1856 In 
1861 he was commissioned colonel and major general of Florida state troops in the 
Confederate Army. 

[414] 



To Simon Cameron 1 

June 22, 1861 

If agreeable to the Secretary of War, I approve the receiving one 
of the regiments already accepted from Indiana, organized and 
equipped as a cavalry regiment. A. LINCOLN. 

1 OR, HI, I, 275. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from Governor 
Oliver P. Morton, June 17, 1861, introducing Robert Dale Owen, author, re- 
former, and ex-congressman (1843-1847) ". . . authorized to present for your 
consideration our cavalry regiment being now raised upon the border. . . ." 
Cameron communicated Lincoln's acceptance ". . . . conditioned, however, that 
it shall be one, or take the place of one, of infantry already accepted. . . ." 
(Ibid., p. 291). 

To Heads of Bureaus 1 

June 22, 1861 

To the Heads of Bureaus in the War, Navy and other Depart- 
ments. 

You will please, under the direction of my private Secretary, 
make to me such abstract reports, as will show the number of men 
now enlisted as soldiers or seamen in the service of the United 
States, or mustered into the service as State Militia or Volunteers, 
the state of their equipment and drill, the time of their probable 
readiness for active service, and the place of rendezvous or present 
station. Also (if practicable) like information in regard to the or- 
ganization of military forces in the Free States, under State author- 
ity. Also the number and kind of arms and ammunition furnished, 
and yet on hand, and being manufactured. Also the number and 
description of War vessels and transports at present owned or 
chartered by the government, where and on what service at pres- 
ent stationed and the number description and time of probable 
readiness for service of those being prepared. A LINCOLN 

Washington June 22, 1861. 

1 Copy, DNA WR RG 156, Office of Chief of Ordnance, WD 760. The copy 
also has an endorsement signed by Simon Cameron and Gideon 'Welles, "Please 
assist Mr Nicolay in obtaining aU the information he desires." 

To James W. Ripley 1 

June 22, 1861 

This introduces to Gen. Ripley, the Hon. Robt. Dale Owen, of 
la, 2 an inteligent, disinterested, and patriotic gentleman, who 
wishes to talk briefly about arms. A. LINCOLN 

June 22. 1861. 

[415] 



JTUISTE 24, l86l 

* ALS, THaroL. This introduction is misdated (NH, XI, 116) January 22, 
1861. Owen was appointed by Governor Oliver P. Morton as agent to purchase 
arms in Europe for Indiana troops. 2 Indiana. 



To William H. Seward 1 

Hon. Sec. of State Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir June 24. 1861 

I think we would as well have a Cabinet meeting at 12 to-day. 
Please have the members notified. Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, PHi. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: June 25. 1861 

Col. Richard D. Goodwin, wishes to tender another Regiment 
from New- York. With your concurrence, and the consent of the 
Governor of New- York, I have no objection. Please give him a short 
interview, and look at the notice of his Regiment which he will 
show you in the New- York Tribune. 2 Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

* ALS, owned by Henry R. Benjamin, New York City. Colonel Richard D. 
Goodwin was authorized July 22, 1861, to recruit the regiment known as the 
President's Life Guard, which became a part of the Fifty-ninth New York In- 
fantry, Goodwin was not retained as colonel and was not commissioned. 

2 The Tribune, June 23, 1861, published a notice of the organization of the 
President's Life Guard. 



To Ward H. Lamon 1 

Col W. H. Lamon Washington, B.C. 

My dear Sir June 25. 1861 

I spoke to the Secretary of War yesterday, and he consents, & 
so do I, that as fast as you get companies, you may procure a U.S. 
officer, and have them mustered in. Have this done quietly; because 
we can not do the labor of adopting it as a general practice. Yours 
as ever A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, CSnaH. On June 18, 1861, Lamon reported from Williamsport, Mary- 
land, on his recruitment of Virginians: "The refugees are still coming from 
the *sacred soil* (that formerly flowed with milfr & honey) I wish you would 
see Mr Cameron and get him to authorise me to have those Virginians mus- 
tered . . . 'without reference to the minimum number. ... I fear an enormous 
expense individually in provisioning the men as they come. . . . Lieut Smalley 
. . . Qt-Master and Commissary is unwilling to muster in the men until each 

[416] 



J U 3NT E 27, l86l 

particular Co. shall have 85 men. . . ." (DLC-RTL.) . Lamon was "Colonel" by 
appointment of Governor Yates of Illinois, February 9, 1861, but had no federal 
commission in the army. 

To Queen Victoria 1 

June 265 1861 
Abraham Lincoln, 

President of the United States of America, 
To Her Majesty Victoria, 

Queen of the United Kingdom 

of Great Britain and Ireland, 

&c, &c, &c. 

Great and Good Friend: 

I have received the letter in which you have made known to me 
the affliction you have sustained in the death of your justly la- 
mented parent, the Duchess of Kent. I tender to you my sincere 
condolence, with that of the whole American people, in this great 
bereavement, and pray God to have Your Majesty and your whole 
Royal Family constantly under his gracious protection and care. 

"Written at "Washington, this twenty-sixth day of June, in the 
year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and sixty-one. Your 
Good Friend, AJBRABCAM: LiisrcoLisr. 

By the President: 

WILLIAM: H. SEWARD, Secretary of State. 

1 L.S, Public Record Office, London, England. 

To Joseph G. Totten 1 

Gen. Totten. Executive Mansion June 2/th 1861. 

Dear Sir: I have appointed the following persons as cadets "at 
large" to the Military Academy at West Point, to fill existing va- 
cancies: 

Charles Henry Breckenridge 2 Ky. 

J. Hollins McBlair 3 NX 

Cyrus M. Allen Jr 4 Vincennes, Ind. 

"William H. Redwood Junr. 5 Washington D. C. 

Your obt Servt. 

Lmcouxr 



* LS, DNA WR RG 94, U.S. Military Academy, 1861, No. 67, Box /7- 

2 Cadet, September i, i86i-June 23, 1865. 

3 John Hollins McBlair, Jr., was commissioned first lieutenant in the new 
Fifteenth Infantry of the Regular Army and did not attend West Point. 

4 Cadet, September i, i86i~June 23, 1865. 5 No record of appointment. 

[417] 



To William H. Seward 1 

Hon. Sec. of State. Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir, June 29. 1861. 

Please send a Commission for Theodore Canissius, of Ills as Con- 
sul to Vienna. The place is but $1000, and not much sought; and 
I must relieve myself of the Dr. Illinoisian, tho, he be. Yours truly 

A. 



1 Copy, DLC-RTL. Gustave Koerner to Lincoln, June 13, 1861, recommended 
Canisius for appointment and added: "I am not aware that a single one of the 
many Germans, -who have been recognized by your administration, was in your 
favor at Chicago. Now this does seem strange, and it ought to be remedied. . . ." 
(DLC-RTL). Gamsius received the appointment. 

List of Army Promotions 1 

[c. July, 1861] 

List of officers I wish to remember, when I make appointments from 
the officers of the regular Army 
Maj. Anderson 
Capt. Doubleday 
Capt Foster 
Maj. Hunter 

Lieut. Slemmer His pretty wife says, a major, or first 
captain. 

1 AD, DLC-RTL. This undated memorandum was written prior to July 13, 
1861, on which date Lincoln sent to the Senate Robert Anderson's promotion 
to brigadier general. Abner Doubleday's promotion to major, Sanford Foster's 
reappointment as captain, David Hunter's promotion to colonel, and Adam 
J. Slemmer's promotion to major all were made with the list of Regular Army 
appointments submitted under date of July 31 and received by the Senate Au- 
gust 2, 1861. 

Memorandum: Appointment of James Shields 
and Michael Corcoran 1 

[c. July, 1861] 
Private 

Thomas Francis Meagher, as well as Senator Latham & Gen. Den- 
ver, desire the appointment of Shields. 2 

Bishop Hughes thinks Corcoran should be appointed; and my own 
judgment concurs in both cases. 3 

iAD, IHi. 

2 James Shields, Lincoln's former political opponent in Illinois, now of Cali- 
fornia, was appointed brigadier general of Volunteers, August 19, 1861. His 
supporters as listed were: Thomas F. Meagher, major of the Sixty-ninth New- 
York Regiment, who was also promoted to brigadier; James W. Denver, brev- 
etted major general in the Mexican war, who had served under President 

[418] 



JTTJLY 3, l86l 

Buchanan as governor of Kansas and commissioner of Indian affairs; and 
Senator Milton S. Latham of California. 

3 Michael Corcoran, colonel of the Sixty-ninth New York Regiment, recom- 
mended by Roman Catholic Archbishop John J. Hughes of New York, was 
appointed brigadier general of Volunteers July 21, 1861. 

To Winfield Scott 1 

July 2, 1861 
To the Commanding General of the Army of the United States. 

You are engaged in repressing an insurrection against the laws of 
the United States. If, at any point, on or in the vicinity of any mili- 
tary line which is now, or which shall be used, between the City of 
New York and the City of Washington, you find resistance which 
renders it necessary to suspend the writ of Habeas Corpus for the 
Public Safety, you, personally, or through the Officer in command, 
at the point where resistance occurs, are authorized to suspend that 
writ. 

Given under my hand, and the Seal of the United 

States, at the City of Washington, this second day of 

[L.S.] July, A.D. 1861, and of the Independence of the 

United States the 85th. ABRAHAM LirccouNT 

By the President of the United States: 

WILLIAM: H. SKWAB.D, Secretary of State, 
i DS, NN. 

To James W. Ripley 1 

Gen. Ripley Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir July 3, 1861 

Senator McDougal[l], of California, brings you this. I wish you 
would oblige him, if possible, about furnishing arms for a certain 
Regiment 2 in which he feels a peculiar interest. If you can oblige 
him in this, I shall be personally obliged. Yours truly 

A. LiisrcoLisr 

1 ALS, IHL The envelope is addressed by Lincoln: "Gen. Kipley/ From the 
President,/ asking an interview/ for Senator McDougal." 

2 The regiment was probably the First California, raised in Pennsylvania by 
Edward D. Baker. 

To William H. Seward 1 

Hon. Sec. of State Executive Mansion July 3. 1861 

My dear Sir Gen. Scott had sent me a copy of the despatch, of 
which you kindly sent one. 2 Thanks to both him and you. 

Please assemble the Cabinet at 12 to-day, to look over the Mes- 
sage, and reports. 

[419] 



JULY 4, l86l 

And now, suppose you step over at once, and let us see Gen. 
Scott, Gen. Cameron, about assigning a position to Gen. Fremont? 3 
Yours as ever A LIISTCOJLJNT 

1 ALS, NAuK 

2 The dispatch was probably that of July 2, from Major General Robert Pat- 
terson at Black River, near Martinsburg, announcing that he had routed 10,000 
rebels with the loss of three killed and ten wounded. 

3 General Orders No. 40, July 3, created the Western Department including 
Illinois and all west of the Mississippi, with Fremont in command. 

Temperance Declaration 1 

[c. July 4, 1861] 
Temperance Declaration of Eleven Presidents 

of the United States. 

Being satisfied from observation and experience, as well as from 
medical testimony, that ardent spirits, as a drink, is not only need- 
less, but hurtful and that the entire disuse of it would tend to pro- 
mote the health, the virtue and happiness of the community: we 
hereby express our conviction, that should the citizens of the 
United States, and especially all young men, discountenance en- 
tirely the use of it, they would not only promote their own per- 
sonal benefit, but the good of the country and of the world. 

James Madison, James K. Polk, 

John Quincy Adams, Za chary Taylor, 

Andrew Jackson, Millard Fillmore, 

Martin Van Buren, Franklin Pierce, 

John Tyler, James Buchanan, 

Abraham Lincoln. 

1 Journal of the American Temperance Union: and The New-York Prohibi- 
tionist, August, 1861, XXIV, No. 8. The declaration as printed is accompanied 
by a letter from Edward C. Delavan, ex-wine merchant and noted temperance 
worker and lecturer, dated July 4, 1861, which reads in part: 

"President Lincoln has recently returned me, signed, the Presidential Tem- 
perance Declaration. 

"In 1833, I obtained the signatures of Presidents Madison, Jackson, and 
Adams. ... As new Presidents have been elected, the parchment . . . has 
been sent to Washington, and in every case returned signed. 

"President Harrison died before I had an opportunity of sending the certif- 
icate. . . ." 

Fragment of Draft of Message to Congress 1 

[July 4, 1861] 
Random 6. 

I recommend that yon give the legal means for making this contest 
a short, and a decisive one that you authorize to be applied to the 

[420] 



JULY 4, 1861 

work, at least three hundred thousand men, and three hundred 
millions of dollars. That number of men is less than one twelfth 2 
of those of proper ages, within those regions where all are willing 
to engage; and the sum is less than an eighteenth 8 of the money- 
value owned by the men who are ready to devote the whole. A 
right result will be worth more to the world than ten times the 
men, and ten times the money. The evidence reaching us from the 
people leaves no dotibt that the material for the work is abundant; 
and that it needs only the hand of legislation to give it legal sanc- 
tion; and the hand of the Executive to give it practical shape and 
efficiency. The departments here have had more trouble to avoid 
receiving troops faster than they could provide them than from 
any other cause. In a word, the people will save their government, 
if the government itself will allow them. 

1 AD, DLC-RTL. The single page of manuscript is a preliminary draft of the 
twentieth paragraph of the Message of July 4, infra. 

2 "Tenth" deleted, "twelfth" inserted. 

3 "Tenth" deleted, "eighteenth" inserted. 



Message to Congress in Special Session 1 

July 4, 1861 
Fellow-citizens of the Senate and House of Representatives: 

Having 2 been convened on an extraordinary occasion, as author- 
ized by the Constitution, your attention is not called to any ordinary 
subject of legislation. 

At the beginning of the present Presidential term, four months 

1 AD, first proof sheets with autograph revisions, second proof sheets, two 
copies, (i) with revisions by William H. Seward for the most part in the hand- 
writing of Frederick "W. Seward, (2) with Lincoln's final revisions, DLG-BTL. 
Although engrossed official copies of Lincoln's later Messages are in the National 
Archives, no official copy of the Message of July 4, 1861, has been found. The 
text reproduced here is that of the second proof containing Lincoln's final re- 
visions, which, with the exception of minor changes in punctuation, are noted 
In the succeeding footnotes. Variants, emendations, and deletions made by Lin- 
coln in the manuscript and on the first proof are also indicated in the footnotes. 
Minor inconsistencies in usage occurring in Lincoln's manuscript and autograph 
changes in the proof sheets have been made to conform with the printed proof, 
but Lincoln's paragraphing, punctuation and capitalization in the manuscript 
and autograph corrections have been retained in some cases even though not 
followed by the printers who set the proofs. 

2 The first paragraph revised to the present text in the manuscript, stood 
originally as follows: "Having convened you on an extraordinary occasion as 
contemplated by the Constitution, I do not ask your attention to any ordinary 
subject of legislation. You will act on your own judgment and pleasure whether 
you will consider any such." 

[421] 



JULY 4, l86l 

ago, 3 the functions of the Federal Government were found to be 
generally 4 suspended within the several States of South Carolina, 
Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, and Florida, excepting 
only those of the Post Office Department. 

Within these States, all the Forts, Arsenals, Dock-yards, Custom- 
houses, and the like, including the movable and stationary property 
in, and about them, had been seized, and were held in open hostility 
to this Government, excepting only Forts Pickens, Taylor, and 
Jefferson, on, and near the Florida coast, and Fort Sumter, in 
Charleston harbor, South Carolina. The Forts thus seized had been 
put in improved condition; new ones had been built; and armed 
forces had been organized, and were organizing, all avowedly with 
the same hostile purpose. 

The Forts remaining in the possession of the Federal govern- 
ment, in, and near, these States, were either 5 besieged or menaced 
by warlike preparations; and especially Fort Sumter was nearly 
surrounded by well-protected hostile batteries, with guns equal in 
quality to the best of its own, and outnumbering the latter as per- 
haps ten 6 to one. A disproportionate share, 7 of the Federal muskets 
and rifles, 8 had somehow found their way into these States, and 
had been seized, to be used against the government. Accumulations 
of the public revenue, lying within them, 9 had been seized for the 
same object. The Navy was scattered 10 in distant seas; leaving but 
a very small part of it within the immediate reach of the govern- 
ment. Officers 11 of the Federal Army and Navy, had resigned in 
great numbers; and, of those resigning, a large proportion had 
taken up arras against the government. Simultaneously, and in 
connection, with all this, the purpose to sever the Federal Union, 
was openly avowed. In accordance with this purpose, an ordinance 

3 "All" standing in the manuscript and first proof, deleted at this point in 
the second proof by Seward. Deletion adopted by Lincoln. 

4 "Entirely" in the manuscript, changed by Seward in the second proof to 
"generally." Adopted by Lincoln. 

5 "Either beseiged or" inserted by Seward in the second proof. Adopted by 
Lincoln. 

6 "Perhaps ten" inserted by Lincoln in the blank space which had stood from 
manuscript to second proof. 

7 "Both in number and quality," in manuscript and first proof, deleted in 
second proof. 

8 "Arms and ammunition," in the manuscript and first proof, deleted in sec- 
ond proof, and "muskets and rifles" inserted. 

9 "These States" in the manuscript and first proof, changed by Seward to 
"them" in second proof. Adopted by Lincoln. 

10 "And" in the manuscript and first proof, deleted at this point in the second 
proof by Seward. Deletion adopted by Lincoln. 

11 "The officers" in the manuscript and first proof; "The" deleted in the sec- 
ond proof by Seward. Deletion adopted by Lincoln. 

[422] 



JULY 4, 1861 

had been adopted in each of these States, declaring the States, re- 
spectively, to be separated from the National Union. A 12 formula 
for instituting a combined government of these states had been 
promulgated; and this illegal organization, in the character of con- 
federate States was already invoking recognition, aid, and inter- 
vention, from Foreign Powers. 

Finding this condition of things, and believing it to be an im- 
perative duty upon the incoming Executive, to prevent, if possible, 
the consummation of such attempt to destroy the Federal Union, 
a choice of means to that end became indispensable. This choice 
was made; and was declared in the Inaugural address. The policy 
chosen looted to the exhaustion of all peaceful measures, before a 
resort to any stronger ones. It sought only to hold the public places 
and property, not already wrested from the Government, and to 
collect the revenue; relying for the rest, on time, discussion, and 
the ballot-box. It promised a continuance of the mails, at govern- 
ment expense, to the very people who were resisting the govern- 
ment; and it gave repeated pledges against any disturbance to 
any of the people, or any of their rights. Of all that which a presi- 
dent might constitutionally, and justifiably, do in such a case, 
everything was foreborne, without which, it was believed pos- 
sible to keep the government on foot. 

On the 5th of March, (the present incumbent's first full day 
in office) a letter of Major Anderson, commanding at Fort Sumter, 
written on the 2 8th of February, and received at the War Depart- 
ment on the 4th of March, was, by that Department, placed in his 
hands. This letter expressed the professional opinion of the writer, 
thai re-inf orcements could not be thrown into that Fort within the 
time for his relief, rendered necessary by the limited supply of 
provisions, and with a view of holding possession of the same, with 
a force of less than twenty thousand good, and well-disciplined 
men. This opinion was concurred in by all the officers of his 
command; and their memoranda on the subject, were made en- 
closures of Major Anderson's letter. The whole was immediately 
laid before Lieutenant General Scott, who at once concurred with 
Major Anderson in opinion. On reflection, 13 however, he took full 

12 This sentence was slightly revised by Lincoln from Seward's suggestion in 
the second proof. The manuscript and first proof read as follows: "Also the 
forms of establishing a federal government of these States, with departments, 
and provisions, similar to our own, had been gone through; and this supposed 
Federal government, under the name and style of 'The Confederate States of 
America/ had assumed national independence, and was suing for it's recognition 
by the powers of the earth." 

13 "At the request of the executive," in the manuscript, replaced by "On re- 
flection," in first proof. 

[423] 



JTTJLY 4, l86l 

time, consulting -with other officers, both of the Army and the 
Navy; and, at the end of four days, came reluctantly, but decided- 
ly, to the same conclusion as before. He also stated 14 at the same 
time that no such sufficient force was then at the control of the 
Government, or could be raised, and brought to the ground, with- 
in the time when the provisions in the Fort -would be exhausted. 
In a purely military point of view, this reduced the duty of the 
administration, in the case, to the mere matter of getting the gar- 
rison safely out of the Fort. 15 

It was 16 believed, however, that to so abandon that position, 
under the circumstances, 17 would be utterly ruinous; that the 
necessity under which it was to be done, would not be fully under- 
stood that, by many, it would be construed as a part of a volun- 
tary policy that, at home, it would discourage the friends of the 
Union, embolden its adversaries, and go far to insure to the lat- 
ter, a recognition 18 abroad that, in fact, it would be OLir national 
destruction consummated. This could not be allowed. 19 Starvation 
was not yet upon the garrison; and ere it would be reached, Fort 
Pickens might be reinforced. This last, would be a clear indication 
of policy, and would better enable the country to accept the evacu- 
ation of Fort Sumter, as a military necessity. An order was at once 
directed to be sent for the landing of the troops from the Steam- 
ship Brooklyn, into Fort Pickens. This order could not go by land, 
but must take the longer, and slower route by sea. The first return 
news from the order was received just one week before the fall of 
Fort Sumter. The news itself was, that the officer commanding 
the Sabine, to which vessel the troops had been transferred from 
the Brooklyn, acting upon some quasi armistice of the late admin- 
istration, (and 20 of the existence of which, the present administra- 
tion, up to the time the order was despatched, had only too vague 
and uncertain rumors, to fix attention) had refused to land the 
troops. To now re-inforce Fort Pickens, before a crisis would be 

14 "Informed the executive," in the manuscript, replaced by "stated," in first 
proof. 

15 The following sentence deleted from the manuscript at this point: "In fact, 
General Scott advised that this should be done at once." 

16 "The executive," in the manuscript, changed to "It was" in first proof. 

17 "Under the circumstances" inserted by Seward and adopted by Lincoln in 
the second proof. 

18 "Of independence," in the manuscript and first proof, deleted at this point 
by Seward Deletion adopted by Lincoln. 

19 "The administration hesitated." in the manuscript, changed in first proof to 
the sentence in the text. 

20 The portion in parentheses appears in the manuscript as a revision of the 
following: "and of the existence of which the present administration had not 
been notified." 

[424] 



JTULY 4 5 1861 

reached at Fort Sumter was impossible rendered so by the near 
exhaustion of provisions in the latter-named Fort. In precaution 
against such a conjuncture, the government had, a few days be- 
fore, commenced preparing an expedition, as well adapted as 
might be, to relieve Fort Sumter, which expedition was intended 
to be ultimately used, or not, according to circumstances. The 
strongest anticipated case, for using it, was now presented; and it 
was resolved to send it forward. As had been intended, in this con- 
tingency, it was also resolved to notify the Governor of South 
Carolina, that he might expect an attempt would be made to provi- 
sion the Fort; and that, if the attempt should not be resisted, there 
would be no effort to throw in men, arms, or ammixnition, with- 
out further notice, or in case of an attack upon the Fort. This no- 
tice was accordingly given; whereupon the Fort was attacked, and 
bombarded to its fall, without even awaiting the arrival of the 
provisioning expedition. 

It is thus seen that the assault upon, and reduction of, Fort Sum- 
ter, was, in no sense, a matter of self defence on the part of the 
assailants. They well knew that the garrison in the Fort could, by 
no possibility, commit aggression upon them. They knew they 
were expressly notified that the giving of bread to the few brave 
and hungry 21 men of the garrison, was all which would on that 
occasion 22 be attempted, unless themselves, by resisting so much, 
should provoke more. They knew that this Government desired to 
keep the garrison in the Fort, not to assail 23 them, but merely to 
maintain visible possession, and thus to preserve the Union from 
actual, and immediate dissolution trusting, as herein-before 
stated, to time, discussion, and the ballot-box, for final adjustment; 
and they assailed, and reduced the Fort, for precisely the reverse 
object to drive out the visible authority of the Federal Union, 
and thus force it to immediate dissolution. 

That this was their object, the Executive well understood; and 
having said to them in the inaugural address, "You can have no 
conflict without being yourselves the aggressors," he took pains, not 
only to keep this declaration good, but also to keep the case so free 
from the power of ingenious sophistry, 24 as that the world should 
not be able to misunderstand it. By the affair at Fort Sumter, with 
its surrounding circumstances, that point was reached. Then, and 
thereby, the assailants of the Government, began the conflict of 

21 "But starving" changed in the manuscript to "and hungry." 

22 "Qn that occasion" inserted by Seward and adopted by Lincoln in "the 
second proof. 23 "Aggress upon" changed in the manuscript to "assail." 

24 "Mystification" changed in the manuscript to "ingenious sophistry." 

[425] 



JULY 4, l86l 

arms, without a gun in sight, or in expectancy, to return their fire, 
save only the f ew in the Fort, sent to that harbor, years before, for 
their own protection, and still ready to give that protection, in 
whatever was lawful. In this act, discarding all else, they have 
forced upon the country, the distinct issue: "Immediate dissolu- 
tion, or blood." 

And this issue embraces more than the fate of these United 
States. It presents to the whole family of man, the question, 
whether a constitutional 25 republic, or a democracy a govern- 
ment of the people, by the same people can, or cannot, maintain 
its territorial integrity, against its own domestic foes. It presents 
the question, whether discontented individuals, too few in numbers 
to control administration, according to organic law, in any case, 
can always, upon the pretences made in this case, or on any other 
pretences, or arbitrarily, without any pretence, break up their Gov- 
ernment, and thus practically put an end to free government upon 
the earth. It forces us to ask: "Is there, in all republics, this in- 
herent, and fatal weakness?" "Must a government, of necessity, 
be too strong for the liberties of its own people, or too weak to 
maintain its own existence?" 

So viewing the issue, no choice was left 26 but to call out the war 
power 27 of the Government; and so to resist force, employed for its 
destruction, by force, for its preservation. 

The call was made; and the response of the country was most 
gratifying; 28 surpassing, in unanimity and spirit, the most san- 
guine expectation. Yet none of the States commonly called Slave- 
states, except Delaware, 29 gave a Regiment through regular State 
organization. A few regiments have been organized within some 
others 30 of those states, by individual enterprise, and received into 
the government 31 service. Of course the seceded States, so called, 
(and to which Texas had been joined about the time of the inau- 
guration,) gave no troops to the cause of the Union. The border 
States, so called, were not uniform in their actions; some of them 
being almost for the Union, while in 32 others as Virginia, North 

25 "Constitutional republic, or a** inserted in second proof. 

26 "The administration had no choice left," in the manuscript, changed to 
the present text in first proof. 

2T "Military power" changed in the manuscript to "war-power." 

28 "To the administration," in the manuscript, deleted at this point in first 
proof. 

29 "Except patriotic Delaware" inserted by Seward and "except Delaware," 
adopted by Lincoln in second proof. 

30 "Others" inserted in second proof. 

31 "United States service" changed in the manuscript to "government serv- 
ice." 32 "in" inserted in second proof. 

[426] 



JULY 4, 1861 

Carolina, Tennessee, and Arkansas the 33 Union sentiment was 
nearly repressed, and silenced. The course taken in Virginia was 
the most remarkable perhaps the most important. A convention, 
elected by the people of that State, to consider this very question 
of disrupting the Federal Union, was in session at the capital of 
Virginia when Fort Sumter fell. To this body the people had cho- 
sen a large majority of professed Union men. Almost immediately 
after the fall of Sumter, many 34 members of that majority went 
over to the original disunion minority, and, with them, adopted 
an ordinance for withdrawing the State from the Union. Whether 
this change was wrought by their great approval of the assault 
upon Sumter, or their great resentment at the government's resist- 
ance to that assault, is not definitely known. Although 35 they sub- 
mitted the ordinance, for ratification, to a vote of the people, to 
be taken on a day then 36 somewhat more than a month distant, 37 
the convention, and the Legislature, (which was also in session at 
the same time and place) with leading men of the State, not mem- 
bers of either, immediately commenced acting, as if the State 
were 38 already out of the Union. They pushed military prepara- 
tions vigorously forward all over the state. They seized the United 
States Armory at Harper's Ferry, and the Navy-yard at Gosport, 
near Norfolk. They received perhaps invited into their state, 
large bodies of troops, with their warlike appointments, from the 
so-called seceded 39 States. They formally entered into a treaty of 
temporary alliance, and co-operation with the so-called "Confed- 
erate States," 40 and sent members to their Congress at Montgom- 
ery. And, finally, they permitted the insurrectionary government 
to be transferred to their capital at Richmond. 

The people of Virginia have thus allowed this giant insurrection 
to make its nest within her borders; and this government has no 
choice left but to deal with it, where it finds it. And it has the less 
regret, as the loyal citizens have, in due form, claimed its protec- 

33 "Were apparantly, quite against it," in the manuscript and first proof re- 
placed in second proof with, the conclusion of the sentence as reproduced here. 

34 "Nearly all the** changed in the manuscript to "many." 

35 "They, however, submitted," in the manuscript, changed in first proof to 
"Although they submitted." 

36 "Then" in the manuscript, omitted in first proof, and inserted in the sec- 
ond proof. 

37 Period and new sentence beginning here in manuscript, changed in first 
proof to the present text. 

38 "Was," in the manuscript and first proof, changed in the second proof to 
"were." 

39 "Confederate" changed in the manuscript to "seceded." 

4 <> "Confederate States of America," in the manuscript and first proof, changed 
to "Confederate States" by Seward and adopted by Lincoln in second proof. 

[427] 



JULY 4, l86l 

tion. Those loyal 41 citizens, this government is bound to recognize, 
and protect, as being Virginia. 

In 42 the border States, so called in fact, the middle states 
there are those who favor a policy which they call "armed neu- 
trality" that is, an arming of those states to prevent the Union 
forces passing one way, or the disunion, the other, over their soil. 
This would be disunion completed. 43 Figuratively speaking, it 
would be the building of an impassable wall along the line of sep- 
aration. And yet, not quite an impassable one; for, under the guise 
of neutrality, it would tie the hands of the Union men, and freely 
pass supplies from among them, to the insurrectionists, which it 
could not do as an open enemy. At a stroke, it would take all the 
trouble off the hands of secession, except only what proceeds from 
the external blockade. It would do for the disunionists that which, 
of all things, they most desire feed them well, and give them 
disunion without a struggle of their own. It recognizes no fidelity 
to the Constitution, no obligation to maintain the Union; and 
while 44 very many who have favored it are, doubtless, loyal citi- 
zens, it is, nevertheless, treason in effect. 

Recurring to the action of the government, it may be stated that, 
at first, a call was made for seventy-five thousand militia; and 
rapidly following this, a proclamation was issued for closing the 
ports of the insurrectionary districts by proceedings in the nature 
of Blockade. So far all was believed to be strictly legal. At this 
point the insurrectionists announced their purpose to enter upon 
the practice of privateering. 45 

41 The sentence "Those citizens are Virginia," in the manuscript, changed 
in first proof to the sentence of the present text. Three additional sentences in 
Lincoln's autograph appear immediately following this sentence inserted at 
bottom of page ten of first proof, but were deleted in favor of the full para- 
graph autograph insertion (see note 42) at the same point. The deleted sentences 
are as follows: "Suppose two respectable gentlemen, both of whom have sworn 
to support the constitution of the United States, shall each, at the same time, 
claim to be Governor of Virginia. Which of the two should this government 
recognize? Him who disregards, or him who keeps, his oath, in this respect?" 

42 This paragraph, not in the manuscript, occurs in first proof as an auto- 
graph page inserted. 

43 "Consummated," in the autograph insertion in first proof, changed in the 
second proof to "completed," 

44 "While they may not all be traitors who have favored it, the thing is, in 
fact, treason in disguise," in the autograph insertion in first proof, changed by 
Seward to the reading adopted by Lincoln in the second proof, Lincoln adding 
the word "doubtless" to Seward's revision. "Treason" is amended to "very 
injurious" in the Congressional Globe Appendix, which is followed by Nicolay 
and Hay, suggesting further revision before release for publication. 

45 Seward deleted, and Lincoln adopted in second proof, the sentence stand- 

[428] 



JULY 4, l86l 

Other calls were made for volunteers, 46 to serve three years, un- 
less sooner discharged; and also for large additions to the regular 
Army and Navy. These measures, whether strictly legal or not, 
were ventured upon, under what appeared to be a popular de- 
mand, and a public necessity; trusting, then as now, that Congress 
would readily ratify them. It is believed that nothing has been 
done beyond the constitutional competency of Congress. 47 

Soon after the first call for militia, it 48 was considered a duty to 
authorize the Commanding General, in proper cases, according to 
his discretion, to suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus; 
or, in other words, to arrest, and detain, without resort to the or- 
dinary processes and forms of law, such individuals as he might 
deem dangerous to the public safety. This 49 authority has purpose- 
ly been exercised but very sparingly. Nevertheless, the legality 
and propriety of what has been done under it, are questioned; 
and 50 the attention of the country has been called to the proposi- 

ing next in the manuscript and first proof, as follows: "On more mature reflec- 
tion, with observation on current events, it was [the administration] concluded 
that the measures adopted were inadequate to the occasion, both by reason of 
the very limited time the militia would be held to serve, and the general in- 
sufficiency of numbers in the regular land and naval forces." Lincoln had 
changed "the administration concluded," appearing in the manuscript, to "it was 
concluded" in first proof. 

46 "Accordingly another call was made for volunteers," in the manu- 
script and first proof, changed by Seward to the present reading adopted in 
the second proof. 

47 Two short paragraphs as revised in the manuscript and first proof are de- 
leted at this point in the second proof by Seward. Deletion adopted by Lincoln. 
They are as follows: 

"Whether the proceedings in the nature of blockade, be technically a block- 
ade, scarcely needs to be considered; since foreign nations only claim what we 
concede, that, as between them and us, the strict law of blockade shall apply. 

"The attention of Congress is sought in aid of this means for suppressing the 
insurrection, as the one affording at once, the greatest efficiency, and least 
danger to life, of any at the control of the government." 

48 "I felt it my duty," in the manuscript, revised in first proof to "it was con- 
sidered a duty." 

49 "At my verbal request, as well as by the Generals own inclination, this 
authority has been exercised," in the manuscript, revised in first proof to "This 
authority has purposely been exercised." 

50 The remainder of this sentence, the next two sentences, and the beginning 
of the next, were revised in first proof to the present text. In the manuscript 
they are as follows: "and I have been reminded from a high quarter that one 
who is sworn to 'take care that the laws be faithfully executed' should not him- 
self be one to violate them. ["So I think" deleted in the manuscript.] Of course 
I gave some consideration to the questions of power, and propriety, before I 
acted in this matter. The whole of the laws which I was sworn to take care that 
they be faithfully executed, were being resisted, and failing to be executed, in 
nearly one third of the states. Must I have allowed them," etc. 

[429] 



jr u L Y 4., 1861 

tion that one who is sworn to "take care that the laws be faith- 
fully executed," should not himself violate them. Of course some 
consideration was given to the questions of power, and propriety, 
before this matter was acted upon. The whole of the laws which 
were required to be faithfully executed, were being resisted, and 
failing of execution, in nearly one-third of the States. Must they 
be allowed to finally fail of execution, even had it been perfectly 
clear, that by the use of the means necessary to their execution, 
some single law, made in such extreme tenderness of the citizen's 
liberty, that 51 practically, it relieves more of the guilty, than of the 
innocent, should, to a very limited extent, be violated? To state the 
question more directly, are all the laws, but one, to go unexecuted, 
and the government itself go to pieces, lest that one be violated? 52 
Even 53 in such a case, would not the official oath be broken, if the 
government should be overthrown, when it was believed that dis- 
regarding the single law, would tend to preserve it? But it was not 
believed that this question was presented. It was not believed that 
any law was violated. The provision of the Constitution that 
"The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus, shall not be suspended 
unless when, in cases of rebellion or invasion, the public safety 
may require it," is equivalent to a provision is a provision that 
such privilege may be suspended when, in cases of rebellion, or in- 
vasion, the public safety does require it. It 54 was decided that we 
have a case of rebellion, and that the public safety does require 
the qualified suspension of the privilege of the writ 55 which was 56 
authorized to be made. Now it is insisted that Congress, and not 
the Executive, is vested with this power. But the Constitution it- 
self, is silent as to which, or who, is to exercise the power; and as 

51 In the manuscript the remainder of this sentence originally read that 
"more rogues than honest men find shelter under it, should, to a very limited 
extent, be violated?" This "was first revised to read as follows: "that practically 
more of the guilty than [of] the innocent, find shelter under it," etc. The sec- 
ond revision on the manuscript stands in the first proof and thereafter, except 
for the insertion "of" in first proof as indicated in brackets. 

52 "Violated," in the first proof, changed by Seward in the second proof to 
"broken." Not adopted by Lincoln. 

53 This and the next two sentences inserted in first proof in Lincoln's auto- 
graph revised three sentences in the manuscript which read as follows: "Even 
in such a case I should consider my official oath broken if I should allow the 
government to be overthrown, when I might think the disregarding the single 
law would tend to preserve it. But, in this case I was not, in my own judgment, 
driven to this ground. In my opinion I violated no law." 

54 "I decided," in the manuscript, revised to "It was decided" in first proof. 

55 "Of habeas corpus," in the manuscript and first proof, deleted in second 
proof. 

56 "Which I authorized," in the manuscript, revised to "which was author- 
ized," in first proof. 

[430] 



JULY 4, l86l 

the provision was 57 plainly made for a dangerous emergency, it 58 
cannot be believed 59 the framers of the instniraent intended, that 
in every case, the danger should run its course, until Congress 
could be called together; the very assembling of which might be 
prevented, as was intended in this case, by the rebellion. 

No 60 more extended argument is now offered; as an opinion, at 
some length, will probably be presented by the Attorney General. 
Whether there shall be any legislation upon the subject, and if 
any, what, is 61 submitted entirely to the better judgment of Con- 
gress. 

The forbearance of this government had been so extraordinary, 
and so long continued, as to lead some foreign nations to shape 
their action as if they supposed the early destruction of our nation- 
al Union "was probable. While this, on discovery, gave the Execu- 
tive some concern, he is now happy to say 62 that the sovereignty, 
and rights of the United States, are now everywhere practically 
respected by foreign powers; and a general sympathy with the 
country is manifested throughout the world. 

The reports of the Secretaries of the Treasury, War, and the 
Navy, will give the information in detail deemed necessary, and 
convenient for your deliberation, and action; while the Executive, 
and all the Departments, will stand ready to supply omissions, or 
to communicate new facts, considered important for you to know. 

It 63 is now recommended that you give the legal means for mak- 
ing this contest a short, and a decisive one; that you 64 place at the 
control of the government, for the work, at least four hundred 

57 "Plainly was made" in the manuscript, revised to "was plainly made" in 
first proof. 

58 "I can not bring myself to believe that the framers of that instrument," in 
the manuscript, revised to the present text in first proof. 

59 "That" in first proof, deleted in second proof. 

60 This sentence is inserted in Lincoln's autograph in first proof, replacing 
the following, in the manuscript: "I enter upon no more extended argument; as 
an opinion, at some length, will be presented by the Attorney General." 

61 "I submit," in the manuscript, revised to "is submitted" in first proof. 

62 The remainder of this sentence is inserted in second proof by Seward and 
adopted by Lincoln, with minor changes in punctuation, in place of the follow- 
ing in the manuscript and first proof: "he finds no cause of complaint against 
the present course of any foreign power, upon this subject." 

63 "I now ask," in the manuscript, revised to "It is now recommended" in 
first proof. 

64 The remainder of this sentence is revised to its present text in the second 
proof from the following wording in the manuscript and first proof: "that you 

authorize to be applied to the work at least hundred thousand men, and 

three hundred millions of dollars." Seward had inserted "if necessary" follow- 
ing "work" and "4" in the blank space. Lincoln adopted only the latter sug- 
gestion. 

[431] 



JULY 4, l86l 

thousand men, and four hundred millions of dollars. That number 
of men is about one tenth 65 of those of proper ages within the 
regions where, apparently, 66 all are willing to engage; and the sum 
is less than a Irwentythird 67 part of the money value owned by the 
men who seem 68 ready to devote the whole. A debt of six hundred 
millions of dollars nous, is a less sum per head, than was the debt 
of our revolution, when we came out of that struggle; and the 
money value in the country now, bears even a greater proportion 
to what it was then, than does the population. Surely each man 
has as strong a motive now, to preserve our liberties, as each had 
then., to establish them. 

A right result, at this time, will be worth more to the world, 
than ten times the men, and ten times the money. 69 The evidence 
reaching us from the country, leaves no doubt, that the material 
for the work is abundant; and that it needs only the hand of legis- 
lation to give it legal sanction, and the hand of the Executive to 
give it practical shape and efficiency. One 70 of the greatest perplex- 
ities of the government, is to avoid receiving troops faster than it 
can provide for them. In a word, the people will save their gov- 
ernment, if the government itself, will do its part, only indiffer- 
ently well. 

It might seem, at first thought, to be of 71 little difference whether 
the present movement at the South be called "secession" or "re- 
bellion." The movers, however, well understand the difference. At 
the beginning, they knew they could never raise their treason to 
any respectable magnitude, by any name which implies violation 
of law. They knew their people possessed as much of moral sense, 
as much of devotion to law and order, and as much pride in, and 
reverence for, the history, and government, of their common 
country, as any other civilized, and patriotic people. They knew 
they could make no advancement directly in the teeth of these 
strong and noble sentiments. Accordingly they commenced by an 

65 "Less than one twelfth," in the manuscript and first proof, changed in 
second proof to "about one tenth." 

66 "Apparently" inserted in first proof. 

67 "Thirtieth," in the manuscript and first proof, changed in second proof 
to "twentythird." 

68 "Are," in the manuscript, changed to "seem" in first proof. 

69 "It will cost," in the manuscript and first proof at the end of this sentence, 
deleted in second proof. 

70 This sentence was inserted in the manuscript in place of the following: 
"The War Department has great trouble to avoid receiving troops faster than 
it can provide them " Although Lincoln kept "provide them" in his revision, the 
printer made it "provide for them," in second proof. 

71 "Of" not in the manuscript, but printed in first proof and kept in second 
proof. 

[432] 



jruLir 4, 86 t 

insidious debauching of the public mind. 72 They invented an 73 in- 
genious sophism, which, if conceded, was followed by perfectly 
logical steps, through all the incidents, to the complete destruction 
of the Union. The sophism itself 74 is, that any state of the Union 
may, consistently with the national Constitution, and therefore 
lawfully, and peacefully ; withdraw from the Union, without the 
consent of the Union, or of any other state. The little disguise that 
the supposed right is to be exercised only for just cause, themselves 
to be the 75 sole judge of its justice, is too thin to merit any 
notice. 

"With rebellion thus sugar-coated, they have been drugging the 
public mind of their section for more than thirty years; and, until 
at length, they have brought many good men to a willingness to 
take up arms against the government the day after some assem- 
blage of men have enacted the farcical pretence of taking their 
State out of the Union, who could have been brought to no such 
thing the day before. 

This sophism derives much perhaps the whole of its cur- 
rency, from the assumption, that there is some omnipotent, and 
sacred supremacy, pertaining to a State to each State of our Fed- 
eral Union. Our States have neither more, nor less power, than 
that reserved to them, in the Union, by the Constitution no one 
of them ever having been a State out of the Union. The original 
ones passed into the Union even before they cast off their British 
colonial dependence; and the new ones each came into the Union 
directly from a condition of dependence, excepting Texas. And 
even Texas, in its temporary independence, was never designated 
a State. The new ones only took the designation of States, on com- 
ing into the Union, -while that name was first adopted for the old 
ones, in, and by, the Declaration of Independence. Therein the 
"United Colonies" were declared to be "Free and Independent 
States"; but, even then, the object plainly was not to declare their 
independence of 072^ another, or of the Union; but directly the 
contrary, as their mutual pledge, and their mutual action, before, 
at the time, 76 and afterwards, abundantly show. The express 
plighting of faith, by each and all of the original thirteen, in the 
Articles of Confederation, two years later, that the Union shall 

72 "Morals" in the manuscript changed to "mind." 

73 "A single," in the manuscript, changed to "an" in first proof. 

74 ""VVas, and," standing at this point in the manuscript and first proof, de- 
leted in second proof. Italics in this sentence were added in first proof. 

75 "The" not in the manuscript, but is in first proof. 

76 "Then" in the manuscript, changed to "at the time" in three pages of man- 
uscript revision which replaced page eighteen of the first proof. 

[433] 



JTULY 4, 1861 

be perpetual, is most conclusive. Having never been States, either 
in substance, or in name, outside of the Union, whence this mag- 
ical omnipotence of "State rights," asserting a claim of power 77 
to lawfully destroy the Union itself? Much is said about the "sov- 
ereignty" of the States; but the word, even, is not in the national 
Constitution; nor, as is 78 believed, in any of the State constitutions. 
What 79 is a "sovereignty," in the political sense of the term? 
Would it be far wrong to define it "A political community, with- 
out a political superior"? Tested by this, no one of our States, ex- 
cept Texas, ever was a sovereignty. And even Texas gave up the 
character on coming into the Union; by which act, she acknowl- 
edged the Constitution of the United States, and the laws and 
treaties of the United States made in pursuance of the Constitu- 
tion, to be, for her, the supreme law of the land. The States have 
their status IN the Union, and they have no other legal status. If 
they break from this, they 80 can only do so against law, and by 
revolution. The 81 Union, and not themselves separately, procured 
their independence, and their liberty. By conquest, or purchase, 
the Union gave each of them, whatever of independence, and lib- 
erty, it has. The Union is older than any of the States; and, in fact, 
it created them as States. 82 Originally, 83 some dependent colonies 

77 "Of power" appears in manuscript revision of first proof, but not in the 
original manuscript. 

78 "I believe" in the original manuscript, changed to "is believed" in the 
autograph revision of page eighteen in first proof. 

79 Four sentences beginning here are not in the manuscript but appear in the 
autograph revision of page eighteen of the first proof. 

80 "It can only be against law, and by revolution," in the manuscript, 
changed to "they can only do so, against law, and by revolution" in autograph 
revision of page eighteen in first proof. 

81 This sentence and the next do not appear in the manuscript, but are in 
the autograph revision of page eighteen of first proof. 

82 The sentence appearing next in the manuscript pages inserted to replace 
page eighteen of first proof, is deleted in second proof: "As states, the Union 
gave birth to them." This sentence was itself a revision of a longer sentence in 
the original manuscript: "As states, they were born into the Union, not one of 
them, except Texas, ever having had a State Constitution, independent of the 
Union." 

83 The remainder of this paragraph and the next paragraph are as revised 
in first proof. The manuscript version is as follows: "Unquestionably they have 
the powers reserved to them by the constitution; but in those, are not included 
all conceiveable powers, however mischievous or destructive; but such only, as 
were known in the world, at the time, as governmental powers; and surely a 
power to destroy the government itself, was not intended to be among these. And 
if not intended, it has no existence. 

"The right of revolution, is never a legal right. The very term implies the 
breaking, and not the abiding by, organic law. At most, it is but a moral right, 
when exercised for a morally justifiable cause. When exercised without such 
a cause revolution is no right, but simply a wicked exercise of physical power." 

[434] 



JULY 4, l86l 

made the Union; and, in turn, the Union threw off their old de- 
pendence, for them, 84 and made them States, such as they are. 
Not one of them ever had a State constitution, independent 
of the Union. Of course, it is not forgotten that all the new 
States framed their constitutions, before they entered the Union; 
nevertheless, dependent upon, and preparatory to, coming into 
the Union. 

Unquestionably the States have the powers, and rights, reserved 
to them in, and by the National Constitution; but among these, 85 
surely, are not included all conceivable powers, however mischie- 
vous, or destructive; but, at most, such only, as were known in the 
world, at the time, as governmental powers; and certainly, a 
power to destroy the government itself, had never been known as 
a governmental as a merely administrative power. This relative 
matter of National power, and State rights, as a principle, is no 
other than the principle of generality., and locality. Whatever con- 
cerns the whole, should be confided to the whole to the general 
government; while, whatever concerns only the State, should be 
left exclusively, to the State. This is all there is of original prin- 
ciple about it. Whether the National Constitution, in defining 
boundaries between the two, has applied the principle with exact 
accuracy, is not to be questioned. We are all bound by that de- 
fining, without question. 

What 86 is now combatted, is the position that secession is con- 
sistent with the Constitution is lawful., and peaceful. It is not 
contended that there is any express law for it; and nothing should 
ever be implied as law, which leads to unjust, or absurd conse- 
quences. The nation purchased, with money, the countries out of 
which several of these States were formed. Is it just that they shall 
go off without leave, and without refunding? The nation paid very 
large sums, (in the aggregate, I believe, nearly a hundred mil- 
lions) to relieve Florida of the aboriginal tribes. Is it just that she 
shall now be off without consent, or without making any return? 
The nation is now in debt for money applied to the benefit of these 
so-called seceding States, in common with the rest. Is it just, either 
that 87 creditors shall go unpaid, or the remaining States pay the 

84 "For them" inserted in second proof. 

85 "Those," in the manuscript pages replacing page eighteen in first proof, 
changed to "these' 7 in second proof. 

86 "I am combatting the position that secession is consistent with the consti- 
tution is peaceful, and lawful," in the manuscript, revised to the present text 
in first proof. 

87 "The creditors," in the manuscript and first proof, changed to "creditors" 
in second proof. 

[435 J 



.JULY 4, l86l 

whole? A part of the present national debt was contracted to pay 
the old debts of Texas. Is it just that she shall leave, and pay no 
part of this herself? 

Again, if one State may secede, so may another; and when all 
shall have seceded, none is left to pay the debts. Is this quite just to 
creditors? Did we notify them of this sage view of ours, -when 
we borrowed their money? If we now recognize this doctrine, by 
allowing the seceders to go in peace, it is difficult to see what we 
can 88 do, if others choose to go, or to extort terms upon which they 
will promise to remain. 89 

The seceders insist that our Constitution admits of secession. 
They have assumed to make a National Constitution of their own, 
in which, 90 of necessity, they have either discarded, or retained, 
the right of secession, as they insist, it exists in ours. If they have 
discarded it, they thereby admit that, on principle, it ought not to 
be in ours. If they have retained it, by their own construction of 
ours they show that 91 to be consistent they must secede from one 
another, whenever they shall find it the easiest way of settling 
their debts, or effecting any other selfish, or unjust object. The 
principle itself is one of disintegration, and upon which no govern- 
ment can possibly endure. 

If all the States, save one, should assert the power to drive that 
one out of the Union, it is presumed the whole class of seceder 
politicians would at once deny the power, and denounce the act as 
the greatest outrage upon State rights. But suppose that precisely 
the same act, instead of being called "driving the one out," should 
be called "the seceding of the others from that one/' it would be 
exactly what the seceders claim to do; unless, indeed, 92 they make 
the point, that the one, because it is a minority, may rightfully 
do, what the others, because they are a majority, may not right- 
fully do. These politicians are subtle, and profound, on the rights 

88 "Are to" in the manuscript, changed to "can** in first proof. 

89 "In such case, shall we find any more lenders of money, however much we 
may need them?" appearing at this point in the manuscript, deleted in first 
proof. 

90 The remainder of this sentence and the next two are revised in first proof 
and second proof to the present text. In the manuscript they appear as follows: 
"they have departed from ours, in this respect, or they have not. If they have 
departed from ours, they thereby admit that ours ought to be as they have made 
theirs, cutting off the right of secession If they have not departed from ours, 
by their own theoretic and practical construction of ours, which they copy in 
this respect, they show that they will secede from one another, whenever they 
shall find it the easiest way of settling their debts, or effecting any other selfish, 
or unjust object." 

*** "They will," in first proof, replaced in the second proof with "to be con- 
sistent they must." 92 "Indeed" inserted in first proof. 

[436] 



JULY 4, l86l 

of minorities. 93 They 94 are not partial to that power which made 
the Constitution, and speaks from the preamble, calling itself ""We, 
the People." 

It may well be questioned whether there is, to-day, a majority 
of the legally qualified voters of any State, except perhaps 05 South 
Carolina, in favor of disunion. There is much reason to believe 
that 96 the Union men are the majority in many, if not in every 
other one, of the so-called seceded States. The contrary has not 
been demonstrated in any one of them. It is ventured to affirm 97 
this, even of Virginia and Tennessee; for the result of an election, 
held in military camps, where the bayonets are all on one side 
of the question voted upon, can scarcely be considered as demon- 
strating 98 popular sentiment. At such an election, all that large 
class who are, at once, for the Union, and against coercion, would 
be coerced to vote against the Union. 99 

It may be affirmed, without extravagance, that the free institu- 
tions we enjoy, have developed the powers, and improved the con- 
dition, of our whole people, beyond any example in the world. Of 
this we now have a striking, and an impressive illustration. So 
large an army as the government has now on foot, was never be- 
fore known, without a soldier in it, but who had taken his place 
there, of his own. free choice. But more than this: there are many 
single Regiments whose members, one and another, possess full 
practical knowledge of all the arts, sciences, professions, and "what- 
ever else, whether useful or elegant, is known in the world; and 
there is scarcely one, from which there could not be selected, a 
President, a Cabinet, a Congress, and perhaps a Court, abundantly 
competent to administer the government itself. Nor do I say 100 
this is not true, also, in the army of our late friends, now adver- 
saries, in this contest; but if it is, so much better the reason why 

93 "Ever elevating them above the rights of majorities," appearing in the 
manuscript at this point, deleted in first proof. 

94 In the manuscript and first proof the beginning of this sentence reads, "The 
dread of their existence is that power. . . ." etc., changed in second proof to the 
present text. 

95 "Perhaps" inserted by Seward and adopted by Lincoln in second proof. 

96 "That" inserted in first proof. 

97 "Say," in the manuscript, changed to "affirm" in first proof. 

98 "Demonstrative of" as misprinted in first proof, corrected by Lincoln to 
4 'demonstrating," 

99 "And even others, more decidedly for the Union, in sentiment, would be 
carried the same way," appearing at this point in the manuscript, deleted in first 
proof. 

100 "Nor do I know that," in the manuscript and first proof, changed by Sew- 
ard to "I do not say that," and revised by Lincoln in second proof to the present 
text. 

[437] 



JULY 4, l86l 

the government, which has conferred such benefits on both them 
and us, should not be broken up. Whoever, in any section, pro- 
poses to abandon such a government, would do well to consider, in 
deference to what principle it is, that he does it what better he 
is likely to get in its stead whether the substitute will give, or 
be intended to give, so much of good to the people. There are some 
foreshadowings on this subject. Our adversaries have adopted some 
Declarations of Independence; in which, unlike the good old one, 
penned by Jefferson, they omit the words "all men are created 
equal." Why? They have adopted a temporary national constitu- 
tion, in the preamble of which, unlike our good old one, signed by 
Washington, they omit "We, the People," and substitute "We, 
the deputies of the sovereign and independent States." "Why? 101 
Why this deliberate pressing out of view, the rights of men, and 
the authority of the people? 

This is essentially a People's contest. On the side of the Union, 
it is a struggle for maintaining in the world, that form, and sub- 
stance of government, whose leading object is, to elevate the con- 
dition of men to lift artificial weights from all shoulders to 
clear the paths of laudable pursuit for all to afford all, an un- 
fettered start, and a fair chance, in the race of life. Yielding to 
partial, and temporary departures, from necessity, this is the lead- 
ing object of the government for whose existence we contend. 

I am most happy to believe that the plain people understand, 
and appreciate this. It is worthy of note, that while in this, the 
government's hour of trial, large numbers of those in the Army 
and Navy, who have been favored with the offices, have resigned, 
and proved 102 false to the 103 hand which had pampered them, not 
one common soldier, or common sailor is 104 is known to have de- 
serted his flag. 

Great 105 honor is due to those officers who remain true, despite 
the example of their treacherous associates; but the greatest honor, 
and most important fact of all, is the unanimous firmness of the 
common soldiers, and common sailors. To the last man, so far as 
known, 106 they have successfully resisted the traitorous efforts of 
those, whose commands, but an hour before, they obeyed as abso- 

101 "Why this?" in the manuscript, changed to "Why?" in first proof. 

102 "Played," in the manuscript and first proof, changed to "proved" in second 
proof. 

103 "Very," in the manuscript and first proof, deleted in second proof. 

104 "Has," in the manuscript and first proof, changed to "is known to have" in 
second proof. 

105 "Greater" in the manuscript and first proof, changed in second proof to 
"Great." loe "So far as known" inserted in second proof. 

[438] 



JTULT 4, 1861 

lute law. This Is the patriotic instinct of the plain people. 
They understand, without an argument, that 107 destroying the 
government, which was made by Washington, means no good 
to them. 

Our popular government has often been called an experiment. 
Two points in it, our people have already settled the successful 
establishing, and the successful administering of it. One still re- 
mains its 108 successful maintenance 1 ^ against a formidable [in- 
ternal] 110 attempt to overthrow it. It is now for them to demon- 
strate to the world, that those who can fairly carry an election., 
can also suppress a rebellion 111 that ballots are the rightful, and 
peaceful, successors of bullets; and that when ballots have fairly, 
and constitutionally, decided, there can be no successful appeal, 
back to bullets; that 112 there can be no successful appeal, except 
to ballots themselves, at succeeding elections. Such will be a great 
lesson of peace; teaching men that what they cannot take by an 
election, neither can they take it by a war teaching all, the folly 
of being the beginners of a war. 

Lest there be some uneasiness in the minds of candid men, as 
to what is to be the course of the government, towards the South- 
ern States, after the rebellion shall have been suppressed, the Exec- 
utive deems it proper to say, it will be his purpose then, as ever, 
to be guided by the Constitution, and the laws; and that he prob- 
ably will have no different understanding of the powers, and duties 
of the Federal government, relatively 113 to the rights of the States, 
and the people, under the Constitution, than that expressed in the 
inaugural address. 114 

He desires to preserve the government, that it may be admin- 
istered for all, as it was administered by the men who made it. 
Loyal citizens everywhere, have the right to claim this of their 
government; and the government has no right to withhold, or 
neglect it. It is not perceived that, in giving It, there Is any coer- 

107 "The," in the manuscript and first proof, deleted in second proof. 

108 "The," in the manuscript and first proof, changed to "it's" in second proof. 

109 "Of it," at this point in the manuscript and first proof, deleted in second 
proof. 

no "Internal" inserted at this point as printed in the Congressional Globe Ap- 
pendix which is f ollowed by Nicolay and Hay. 

111 "That those who can 720* carry an election, can not destroy the govern- 
ment," appearing at this point in the manuscript, deleted in first proof. 

112 The remainder of this sentence inserted in first proof. 

113 "Relative," in the manuscript and first proof, changed to "relatively" in 
second proof. 

114 The manuscript ends at this point. The remainder of the Message was 
composed after first proof had been set. 

[439] 



JULY 4, l86l 

cion, any conquest, or any subjugation, 115 in any just sense of 
those terms. 

The Constitution provides, and all the States have accepted the 
provision, that "The United States shall guarantee to every State 
in this Union a republican form of government." But, if a State 
may lawfully go out of the Union, having done so, it may also 
discard the republican form of government; so that to prevent its 
going out, is an indispensable means., to the end., of maintaining 
the guaranty mentioned; and when an end is lawful and obliga- 
tory, the indispensable means to it, are also lawful, and obligatory. 

It was with the deepest regret that the Executive found the duty 
of employing the war-power, in defence of the government, forced 
upon him. He could but perform this duty, or surrender the ex- 
istence of the government. No 116 compromise, by public servants, 
could, in this case, be a cure; not that compromises are not often 
proper, but that no popular government can long survive a marked 
precedent, that those who carry an election, can only save the 
government from immediate destruction, by giving up the main 
point, upon which the people gave the election. The people them- 
selves, and not their servants, can safely reverse their own delib- 
erate decisions. As a private citizen, the Executive 117 could not have 
consented that these institutions shall perish; much less could he, 
in betrayal of so vast, and so sacred a trust, as these free people 
had confided to him. He felt that he had no moral right to shrink; 
nor even to count the chances of his own life, in what might fol- 
low. In full view of his great responsibility, he has, so far, done 
what he has deemed his duty. You will now, according to your 
own judgment, perform yours. He sincerely hopes that your views, 
and your action, may so accord with his, as to assure all faithful 
citizens, "who have been disturbed in their rights, of a certain, and 
speedy restoration to them, under the Constitution, and the laws. 

115 "Which any honest man should regret," -which concludes this sentence in 
Lincoln's autograph insertion at this point in the first proof, is changed by Sew- 
ard in the second proof to "or any deprivation of any citizen of any right of life, 
liberty, or pursuit of happiness, guaranteed to him by the Constitution or the 
laws of the land." Lincoln did not f ollow Seward's revision, but changed the con- 
clusion of the sentence to the present text, and added the next paragraph follow- 
ing. 

116 This sentence and the next are revised in the autograph pages of first proof 
to the present text. As first written they were as follows: "No compromise could, 
in his judgment, be a cure; but, at best, could only be a little more lingering death 
to our popular institutions. No popular government can long survive a precedent, 
that those who have carried an election, musty on pain of death to the government 
itself, surrender the point upon which the people gave the election." 

117 "He," in the autograph pages of revision at the end of the first proof, 
changed to "the Executive" in second proof. 

[440] 



JULY 4, l86l 

And having thus chosen our course, without guile, and with 
pure purpose, let us renew our trust in God, 118 and go forward 
without fear, and with manly hearts. ABRAHAM LINCOLN 

July 4, 1861. 

us "In the justness of God" as first written, revised to "in God'* in the auto- 
graph pages of first proof. 



Memorandum : 
Appointment of Horatio N. Taft, Jr. 1 

[July 4, 1861] 

Horatio N. Taft, the boy-bearer of this, wishes to be a page. By 
the within, his father seems to be willing; and, as he is a play-mate 
of my little boys, I am quite willing, A. 



1 AES, owned by Leo MacDonough, Huntington Park, California. Lincoln 
wrote the endorsement on the back of a note dated July 4, 1861, from Horatio N 
Taft, chief examiner in the patent office. Appointed by President Buchanan, Taft 
was retained by Lincoln because of his staunch Union sympathies. His note reads: 
"Should the President feel disposed to favor the request of the bearer my son 
who seems determined to assert his Independence, his kindness would be highly 
appreciated." Since page boys are not listed in the U.S. Official Register as of 
September 30, 1861, the outcome of the boy's application has not been determined. 



Remarks at a Review of New York Regiments 1 

July 4, 1861 

Gentlemen: I trust you will not censure me for thus appearing 
before you, and assuming such a prominent position, for there is a 
kind of rule that constrains me to do so. I am aware that you are 
more desirous of having Gen. Scott appear before you than myself, 
and I therefore take great pleasure in introducing him to you. 

Gentlemen, I appear before you in obedience to your call; not, 
however, to make a speech. I have made a great many poor speeches 
in my life, and I feel considerably relieved now to know that the 
dignity of the position in which I have been placed does not per- 
mit me to expose myself any longer. ["Go on!" and laughter.] I 
therefore take shelter, most gladly, in standing back and allowing 
you to hear speeches from gentlemen who are so very much more 
able to make them than myself. ["Go on!"] I thank you for the 
kindness of your call, but I must keep good my word, and not be 
led into a speech, as I told you I did not appear for that purpose. 
[Laughter and applause.] 

[441] 



JULY 6, l86l 

1 Washington, D.C., National Republican, July 8, 1861. Following the re- 
view of the New York regiments, the president introduced General Winfield 
Scott, members of the cabinet, and other officers on the platform, most of whom 
made short speeches. Lincoln's further remarks were in response to the call of 
the crowd. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon Sec. of War. Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir July 6. 1861 

The friends of Capt. Julius Hay den, of the 2nd. Infantry in the 
old Regular Army, wish him to be appointed a Paymaster. I do 
not know him personally; but I do know some of his friends. It is 
said he stands well in the Army, and has been over brevetted. 
Please place his name where it will be remembered, and consid- 
ered, when appointments of this sort are made. Yours truly 

A. 



1 AILS, IHi. Julius Hay den, brevetted captain, August 20, 1847, and commis- 
sioned to permanent rank June 30, 1850, was appointed major in the Tenth In- 
fantry, March 15, 1862. 



To Caleb B. Smith 1 

Hon. Sec. of Interior Executive Mansion July 6. 1861 

My dear Sir: Please ask the Comr. of Indian Affairs, and of 
the Genl. Land Office to come with you, and see me at once. 2 I 
want the assistance of all of you in overhauling the list of ap- 
pointments a little before I send them to the Senate. Yours truly 

A. Liisrcousr 

1 ALS-P, ISLA. 2 "William P. Dole and James M. Edmunds. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir July 8. 1861 

L. Eugene Yorke, of New- Jersey, ought, if possible, to be ap- 
pointed a Lieutent \_sic\ in the Army. Mr. Nixon, Member of 
Congress, very much desires this appointment; & I would like for 
him to be obliged. Your Obt. Servt. A. 



1 ALS, owned by Edward C. Stone, Boston, Massachusetts. Louis E. Yorke, rec- 
ommended by Representative John T. Nixon of New Jersey, was appointed cap- 
tain in the Thirteenth Infantry, August 5, 1861. 

[442] 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir July 8. 1861 

Please lose no time, in giving an interview to Adjt. Genl. Wheat 
of Western Virginia., and furnishing him, if possible with what 
arms, equipage &c. &c. he needs. This is very important, and 
should not be neglected or delayed. Yours truly A. LixsrcoLJsr 

1 ALS-P, ISLA. Adjutant General James S. Wheat's inability to get action 
from the War Department brought a letter from Virginia Unionist Representa- 
tive John S. Carlile, who became U.S. Senator July 9, replacing Robert M. T. 
Hunter: "House of Representatives, July 8, 1861. . . . Complaint is made out 
of the State that we are not defending ourselves How can we, without arms . . . 
or anything of defense in our hands? I have written again and again to the Sec- 
retary of War. . . ." (OR, III, I, 323-24). 



To Richard D. Goodwin 1 

Richard D. Goodwin Executive Mansion July 8 1861 

My Dear Sir If "when Congress shall have acted in the prem- 
ises it shall so have acted as to authorise me to receive Regiments 
of troops into the United States Service and you shall then have 
a bona fide Regiment on foot ready and prepared according to the 
law that may be to be mustered into the U S Service present this 
letter to me without delay and I will accept your Regiment upon 
the conditions stated Yours &c A LiisrcoLisr 

1 Copy, DNA WR RG 107, Secretary of War, Personnel Appointments, 
Box 34. See Lincoln to Cameron, June 25, 1861, supra, about Goodwin's regi- 
ment. 



Memorandum : 
Appointment of Charles J. Simons 1 

[c. July 8 9 1861] 

Mr. Senator Harris, of N.Y. especially desires the appointment 
to West Point, of Simons, not of N.Y. but son of a foreign- 
Missionary from some one of the Western States, himself now at 
Exeter Academy N.H. 

* AE, DNA WR RG 94, U.S. Military Academy, 1861, No. 793, Box 79. Lin- 
coln's endorsement is written on the envelope of a letter from Clara Harris to 
her father, July 8, 1861. Charles J. Simons did not receive an appointment to 
West Point, but enlisted at Exeter on June 12, 1862, as sergeant in the Ninth New 
Hampshire Volunteers. 

[443] 



To Gideon Welles 1 

[c. July 9, 1861] 

James M. Chambers was appointed Navy Agent at Philadelphia, 
some days ago. Send over the Commission. Yours LINCOLN 

i Parke-Bernet Catalog 344, February 8-9, 1939? No. 240; Stan. V. Henkels 
Catalog 1342, January 4, 1924, No. 39. The text is the same in the two sources 
except for the last sentence, in which Henkels gives "me" instead of "over." 
Not James M. Chambers, but James S. Chambers was nominated by Lincoln 
on July 9, 1861. He was confirmed by the Senate on July 19. 

To Simon B. Buckner 1 

July 10, 1861 

It is my duty, as I conceive, to suppress an insurrection exist- 
ing within the United States. I wish to do this with the least pos- 
sible disturbance, or annoyance to well disposed people anywhere. 
So far I have not sent an armed force into Kentucky; nor have I 
any present purpose to do so. I sincerely desire that no necessity 
for it may be presented; but I mean to say nothing which shall 
hereafter embarrass me in the performance of what may seem to 
be my duty. 

(Copy of this delivered to Gen. Buckner this loth, day of July 



1 ADf, DLC-RTL. Governor Berlah MagofSn of Kentucky wrote Lincoln, June 
25, 1861, that he was sending Simon B. Buckner, inspector general of the Ken- 
tucky State Guard ". . . to communicate with you in my behalf. . . ." (DLC- 
RTL). The object of Buckner's mission was to secure Lincoln's approval of 
Kentucky's "neutrality." Buckner was offered a brigadier generalship, but de- 
clined and later accepted a similar commission in the Confederate Army. 

To James Mandeville Carlisle 1 

J. Mandeville Carlisle. July 10, 1861. 

I ^rish much to have your opinion, confidentially, on the effect 
of these measures, if they be passed. Will the Resolution remove 
the difficulties which you suggested, as preventing the condemna- 
tion of vessels captured for B[r]each of the Blockade? Will it have 
the effect in cases of vessels already captured hereafter? Taking the 
Resolution and the Bill together do they leave the President 
the option of continuing a Blockade under the laws of Na- 
tions? ... A. L. 

1 Hertz, II, 840. James M. Carlisle, a Washington attorney, was retained by 
various Central and South American governments and the British legation as 
legal adviser. The specific resolution and bill about which Lincoln asked an 
opinion have not been determined. 

[444] 



Memorandum : 
Appointment of David H. Wheeler 1 

[July 10, 1861] 

A Mr. Morse 2 has been appointed from Iowa to this place, & the 
Iowa delegation say he is "unfit for the place. 

1 AE, DNA FS KG 59, Appointments, Box 401. Lincoln's endorsement is 
written on the letter of James Harlan, James W. Grimes, and William "Van- 
dever, July 10, 1861, recommending David H. Wheeler for consul at Genoa. 

2 Lincoln had nominated Charles E. Moss (not "Morse") for consul at Genoa, 
July 9, and withdrew the nomination in favor of that of David EL Wheeler under 
date of July , 1861 {Executive Journal, July 20, 1861). 



To William H. Seward 1 

[c. July 10. 1861] 
Let It be done. LINCOLN. 

1 Anderson Galleries Catalog 1669, October 16-19, 1922, No. 695. According 
to the catalog description Lincoln's endorsement appears on a letter from 
Seward about appointing Richard Robertson of California as consul. On July 
10, 1861, Richard L. Robertson was nominated consul at Mazatlan. He was 
confirmed by the Senate on July 26. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir July 11. 1861 

Hon. John Covode presents the name of William D. Slack, for 
a Lieutenancy. Mr. Covode says he has not had one for his Dis- 
trict; and I think he ought to have this, especially as the young 
man is generally very competent & proper & has considerable 
military experience. Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, DLC-Cameron Papers. Lincoln enclosed a letter from H. A. and S. D. 
Dudley of Brady's Bend, Pennsylvania, to Representative Covode, asking the 
appointment. There is no record of Slack's appointment. 

To Hannibal Hamlin 1 

[July 11? 1861] 

Will the Vice-President please please [_sic] procure Professor 
Hitchcock to preach, as indicated by Gov. Morgan? Yours as ever 

A. 



1 AILS, CSmH. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of a letter from 
Edwin D. Morgan to Lincoln, dated July 8, 1861, recommending a sermon which 

[445] 



JULY 11, l86l 

Morgan had Heard preached by Reverend Roswell D. Hitchcock, professor at 
Union Theological Seminary, New York City. "Professor Hitchcock is going to 
Washington. . . . can you not get him to preach . . . next Sunday morning 
and go yourself & hear him. His sermon, will do great good. . . ." 

To the House of Representatives 1 

To the House of Representatives. July 11, 1861 

In answer to the Resolution of the House of Representatives of 
the Qth instant, requesting a copy of correspondence upon the 
subject of the incorporation of the Dominican Republic "with the 
Spanish Monarchy, I transmit a report from the Secretary of State, 
to whom the Resolution was referred. ABRAHAM: LINCOLN 

Washington, nth July, 1861. 

1 DS, DNA RG 233, Executive Documents, Thirty-seventh Congress, No. 3. The 
accompanying message from Secretary Seward reported ". . . that it is not deemed 
advisable to communicate the correspondence at this juncture " The resolution 
(House Journal, July 9, p. 53) requested the President to inform the House 
** . . what protest, if any, our government has made against the insolent and 
aggressive conduct of the Spanish government." 

Memorandum : 
Appointment of William H. Acker 1 

July 11, 1861 

Presented by Mr. Senator Rice, who personally desires that 
William H. Acker, Capt. in ist. Minnesota Regt. now near Alex- 
andria, shall be a first Lieut, of infantry and Mr Rice must be 
obliged in this as soon as it can be done. A. LINCOLN 

July 11. 1861. 

1 AES, DLC-Cameron Papers. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the "back of 
a letter from William Crooks of St. Paul, Minnesota, to Senator Henry M. Bice, 
July 4, 1861, requesting that William H. Acker be appointed to the Regular 
Army. Senator Rice also endorsed the letter: "Mr. Ackers father is a Republican 
member of our Legislature . . . no better appointment could be made." Acker 
was appointed captain in the Sixteenth Infantry, dated back to May 14, 1861. 

Memorandum : 
Appointment of James H. Armsby 1 

July 11, 1861 

To-day July 11, 1861 Mr. Senator Harris, especially requests 
that Dr. James H. Armsby, may be given some consulate on the 
continent, of $i5oo-or-$2ooo. 

1 AD, DL.C-RTL. Armsby was appointed to the consulship at Naples, at $1500. 

[446] 



To the Senate 1 

To the Senate of the United States. July 11, 1861 

I transmit to the Senate for its consideration with a view to rati- 
fication, a Convention between the United States and Denmark, 
in the subject of deserting seamen, signed in this City on the nth 
instant. ABRAHAM LINCOLN 

Washington, July 11, 1861. 

1 DS, DNA RG 46, Senate, 3/B BS. On July 17 the Senate unanimously adopted 
a resolution of ratification. 

To William H. Seward 1 

July 11, 1861 

Hon. John P. Veree of Pa. wishes George Hogg, to be ap- 
pointed Consul to Trinidad; and as the place has fees only, sup- 
pose we end our responsibility to him by giving it to him at this 
time. 

1 Copy, ISLA. The copy in the Association files was made some years ago from 
the original endorsement on a letter from Representative John Verree, which 
was at that time in the appointment papers of the State Department in The 
National Archives. Efforts to locate the original for the present citation have 
failed. Lincoln's nomination of George Hogg for consul at Trinidad, July 12, was 
confirmed by the Senate, July 26, 1861. 

To Gideon Welles 1 

Hon. Sec. of Navy Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir July 11. 1861 

Mr. George Opdyke, of New- York, especially requests the ap- 
pointment of Justin H. Howard, as a Pay-master in the Navy; and 
if it can be done consistently, let it. Yours truly A. LnsrcouNT 

1 ALS, IHi. There is no record of the appointment of Justin H. Howard to a 
commission in the Navy. 

To Edward Bates 1 

Hon. Atty. General Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir July 12. 1861. 

In your nominations sent me is one for "Christopher G Hewett, 
of Illinois" for Chief Justice of Washington Territory. My memo- 
randum shows that I appointed the man to the place, but not as of 
Illinois; and as I do not know the man personally, or by reputa- 
tion, I think there is some mistake about his being of Illinois. 

[447] 



JTTJLY 3, l86l 

Please see if my note, directing his appointment designates as "of 
Illinois." Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

* AL.S, DNA GE RG 60, Papers of Attorney General, Segregated Lincoln 
Material. Richard Bates to Edward Rates, July 13, 1861: "In reply to your in- 
quiry when refering to me the letter of the President of the 12th inst. . . . The 
commission of Judge Hewitt, was, by his direction, sent to 'Dundee Kane County 
Illinois 9 and his letter acknowledging its receipt is dated at that place. . . ." 
(DLC-RTL.) . Hewitt had migrated from Illinois to Seattle about 1850 His ap- 
pointment is listed as from Washington Territory in the U S. Official Register. 

Memorandum : 

Appointment of George S. Ford 1 

[c. July 13, 1861] 
Kellogg wants to make a swap in this case. 

* AE, DNA RG 94, U.S. Military Academy, 1861, No. 295, Box 78. Lincoln's 
endorsement is "written on a letter from John 33. Caton, July 13, 1861, recom- 
mending appointment of the son of the late Governor Thomas Ford of Illinois 
to West Point. Representative William Kellogg's own son William, Jr., received 
the appointment from his father's district, and since George S. Ford received no 
appointment, the "swap" must have fallen through. 

Appointment of John A. Graham 1 

Washington July 15th. 1861 

John A. Graham, is hereby appointed to discharge the duties 
of Register of the Treasury, during the temporary absence of L. E. 
Chittenden, from Washington. ABRAHAM LINCOLN 

1 DS, DLC. John A. Graham was chief clerk in the register's office. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

July 15, 1861 

The father of the young man Levi Davis within recom- 
mended for a Lieutenancy, is a very highly valued friend of mine, 
of long standing; and Col. Paine to say nothing of others who 
recommends him, is a fine officer educated at West Point, and 
who served in the Florida War. I therefore hope a Lieutenancy can 
be found for him. A. LINCOLN 

July 15. 1861. 

1 AES-P, ISLA. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of a letter from 
Colonel Eleazar A. Paine of the Ninth Illinois Volunteers, Cairo, Illinois, July 3, 
1861, recommending Levi Davis, Jr. for a second lieutenancy. There is no record 
of a commission for Levi Davis prior to January, 1863, when First Sergeant Levi 
Davis of the Ninety-seventh Illinois was commissioned second lieutenant. 

[448] 



Memorandiim : 
Appointment of Joseph G. Knapp 1 

[c. July 15, 1861] 

Mr. Senator Doolittle, of Wis. especially wishes Joseph. G. 
Knapp to be a Judge in New-Mexico. 

* AE, DNA RG 60, Papers of Attorney General, Appointments, New Mexico, 
Box 659. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the envelope of a letter signed By 
James R. Doolittle and others, July 15, 1861, requesting Knapp's appointment. 
Lincoln's nomination of Joseph G. Knapp of Wisconsin as associate justice for 
New Mexico was confirmed by the Senate, August 5, 1861. See Lincoln to Bates, 
August 5, infra. 



Memorandum: Defeat at Vienna, Virginia 1 

[July 15, 1861] 

A, day or two before the disaster at Vienna, Gen. Tyler 2 had by 
orders, with a force gone on the same road three miles beyond that 
point, and returned past it, seeing neither battery or troops of 
which Gen. Schenck had been notified. The morning of the dis- 
aster Gen. Schenck received the order tinder which he acted, 
which is in words and figures following. 

(Here insert it) 3 

As appears by the order, Gen. Schenck was not ordered to go 
himself, but merely to send a regiment; and he went himself, be- 
cause the Colonels of both his regiments happened to be absent; 
but he took Col McCook's regt.; 4 and Col. McCook overtook, and 
joined him before the disaster occurred; and to whom, (he being 
a regularly educated military man) the order was at once shown, 
and Gen S. did nothing afterwards but upon his full concurrence. 
It is not time, as has been stated, that any notice was given Gen. 
Schenck of a battery, being at Vienna. It is true that a country- 
man told Gen. Schenck he had heard there were troops at Vienna. 
He was asked if he had seen them, and he said not; he was asked 
if he had seen any one who had seen them; and he said not; but 
he had seen a man who had heard there were troops there. This 
was heard by CoL McCook as well as Gen. Schenck; and on con- 
sultation, they agreed that it was but a vague rumor. 

It is a fact, that not one officer, or private, who was present at 
the disaster, has ever cast a word of blame upon either Gen. 
Schenck, or CoL McCook; but, on the contrary, they are all anxious 
to have another trial under the same officers. 

[449] 



JULY l6, l86l 

1 ADf, DLC-RTL. On June 17, 1861, the First Ohio Regiment of Brigadier 
General Robert C. Schenck's brigade, in transit on the Loudon and Hampshire 
Railroad under orders from the adjutant general's office, were attacked by Con- 
federate artillery near Vienna, left the train and went into the woods. According 
to Schenck's report, the engineer took off with the locomotive, leaving the cars 
and the regiment behind. Robert G. Schenck to Lincoln, July 15, 1861, enclosed 
the order of June 17 and returned Lincoln's memorandum "... which is all 
right." (DLC-RTL). The memorandum appears to have been prepared by Lin- 
coln on the basis of Schenck's personal report to the president, made in an effort 
to clear himself of charges of neglect. 

2 Brigadier General Daniel Tyler. 

3 The order which Lincoln intended to insert is printed in the Official Records, 
I, II, 125, as follows: 

"Headquarters Department Northeastern Virginia, 

"Arlington, June 17, 1861. 
"Brigadier-General Schenck, Commanding Ohio Brigade: 

"Sir: The general commanding directs that you send one of the regiments of 
your command, on a train of cars, up the Loudon and Hampshire Railroad to the 
point where it crosses the wagon-road running from Fort Corcoran (opposite 
Georgetown) southerly into Virginia. 

"The regiment, being established at that point, will by suitable patrols, feel 
the way along the road towards Falls Church and Vienna, moving, however, with 
caution, and making it a special duty to guard effectually the railroad bridges and 
to look to the track. The regiment will go supplied for a tour of duty of twenty- 
four hours, and will move on the arrival at your camp of a train of cars ordered 
for that purpose, and will relieve all the troops of Colonel Hunter's brigade now 
guarding the line. 

"I am, sir, very respectfully, your obedient servant, 

"JAMES B. FRT, 
"Assistant Adjutant General." 

4 Alexander M. McCook, colonel of the First Ohio. 

To the Senate and House of Representatives 1 

July [16] 1861 
To the Senate and House of Representatives: 

I transmit to Congress a copy of correspondence between the 
Secretary of State and Her Britannic Majesty's Envoy Extraor- 
dinary and Minister Plenipotentiary accredited to this Govern- 
ment., relative to an Exhibition of the products of Industry of all 
nations which is to take place at London in the course of next year. 
As citizens of the United States may justly pride themselves upon 
their proficiency in industrial arts, it is desirable that they should 
have proper facilities towards taking part in the Exhibition. With 
this view, I recommend such legislation by Congress at this session 
as may be necessary for that purpose. ABRAHAM: LUNTCOLN 

Washington, July, 1861. 

1 DS, DNA RG 233, Original Executive Documents, No. 8. This copy in the 
House records is endorsed "by the clerk, "July 6 861, Read, referred to the Com- 

[450] 



JULY 18, l86l 

mittee on Manufactures and ordered to be printed." A joint resolution, approved 
July 27* 1861, appropriated $2,000, and authorized the president to take such 
measures as he deemed best to facilitate a proper representation of the United 
States at the exhibition. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

July 17, 1861 

If it be ascertained at the War Department that the President 
has legal authority to make an appointment such as is asked with- 
in, and Gen. Scott is of opinion it will be available for good, then 
let it be done. A. LmcoLisr 

July 17, 1861 

1 AES, owned by Alfred W. Stern, Chicago, Illinois. Lincoln's endorsement ap- 
pears on a memorial written by Governor William A. Buckingham of Connecticut 
and signed by numerous public men, requesting the appointment of James B. 
Merwin to a commission in the army and assignment to temperance work among 
the soldiers. Lincoln's endorsement is followed by recommendations signed by 
Winfield Scott and Benjamin F. Butler. According to Merwin's account (The 
Christian Advocate, February 6, 1919, pp. 166-67), the appointment was made, 
but no record of an appointment has been found prior to June 13, 1862, when 
Merwin was appointed hospital chaplain. See further Lincoln to Benjamin F. 
Larned, July i, 1862, infra. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

This case must not be neglected when Brigadier Generals are 
to be appointed for the Ohio forces. A L. 

July 17, 1861 

1 AES, owned by R. E. Burdick, New York City. Lincoln's endorsement is 
wxitten on a letter signed by Ohio members of congress recommending Newton 
Schleich, Democratic leader of the Ohio Senate, who had been appointed briga- 
dier of Ohio State Troops by Governor Dennison. Schleich served from April i to 
September 33, 1862, as colonel of the Sixty-first Ohio Volunteers. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

I think Col. Kelly's son ought to be appointed, if possible 
July 18, 1861 A. 



DLC-Cameron Papers. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back 
of a letter from John S. Carlile to Lincoln, dated July 17, 1861, enclosing a letter 
from Brigadier General Benjamin F. Kelley, West Virginia Infantry, wounded 
"... in the action at Philippi," who wished his son Benjamin, Jr., to have a 
commission. The son was made assistant quartermaster of Volunteers with rank 
of captain, March 8 9 864. 

[451] 



To Salmon P. Chase 1 

(Private.'} 

Executive Mansion, July 18, 1861. 

My dear Sir: I can scarcely avoid an "unpleasantness," not to 
say a difficulty, or rupture, respectively with Mr. Senator King and 
Mr. Speaker Grow, unless I can find a place for each a man. Mr. 
Grow, knowing I have Mr. King on hand, as well as himself, was 
here this morning, insisting that the second and fifth auditorships 
are still open, and that I might give them to Mr. King's man and 
to his. Is the fact so? Are those places open? If they are, you 
would both oblige and relieve me by letting them go as indicated. 
Grow's man is Joseph E. Streeter, 2 really of Illinois (no acquaint- 
ance of mine), but, as Grow says, to be charged to Pennsylvania. 

King's man is Smith, 3 of Minnesota. I neither know him 

nor remember his Christian name as given by Mr. Bang. Yours as 
ever, A. LIINTCOLKT. 

1 NH, VI, 329-30. Chase wrote to Lincoln, July 6, 1861, "Senator King pre- 
sented the papers of a Mr. Smith [Simeon Smith?] of Minn, for auditor and 
recommended another Mr Smith [Delano T. Smith] of Minn, for the like place. 

"He withdrew the papers of the first Mr. Smith & the other Mr. Smith was 
made Chief Clerk in the 3d Auditor's office sometime ago, with an understanding 
that he wd be recommended for appointment as Auditor when the public interests 
seem to allow. . . ." (DLC-RTL). On July 19, Chase replied to Lincoln's letter of 
July 18, "Neither of the places . . . can be fairly considered as open. One is 
promised with your sanction to the gentleman who now fills the chief clerkship 
[Ezra B. French?]. . . . For the other you have named several gentle- 
men . . " (DLC-RTL). Ezra B. French was second auditor and John C. Un- 
derwood fifth auditor, as of September 30, 1861. 

2 Joseph E. Streeter was nominated associate justice of Nebraska Territory, 
December 9, 1861, and confirmed January 22, 1862. 

3 Probably Simeon Smith. See memorandum, April 2, supra, and note. 



Memorandum : 

Appointment of Second and Fifth Auditors 1 

July 18, 1861 
Mr. Speaker Grow says, the 5th & 2nd. Auditorships are both 

open to appointments. 

To-day wrote Sec. of Treasury asking these places for Mr. 

Grow's and Mr. King's men. A L. 

July 18, 1861. 

i ADS, DLC-RTL. See Lincoln to CHase, supra. 

[452] 



Memorandum : 
Appointments Recommended by James R. Doolittle 1 

Please add this to Mr. Senator Doolittle's list sent in a day or two 
ago. A. LINCOLN 

July 19, 1861. 

l AES, owned "by Charles W. Olsen, Chicago, Illinois. This note appears on a 
letter from Senator Doolittle, July 19, 1861, recommending appointment of C. 
Seth Cushman as first lieutenant and Charles L.. Noggle as second lieutenant in 
the new regiments of the Regular Army. Noggle was appointed to the Second 
Infantry, and Cushman to the Fourteenth Infantry. 



To the Senate 1 

To the Senate of the United States: July 19, 1861 

I transmit to the Senate, for its advice "with a view to a formal 

execution of the instrument, the draft of a treaty informally 

agreed upon between the United States and the Delaware tribe of 

Indians, relative to certain lands of that tribe. 

Washington, igth July, 1861. ABRAHAM: 



1 Executive Journal, XI, 473. See order for issue of bonds for use of Delawares, 
June 10, supra, and Lincoln to Orville H. Browning, July 20, infra. The treaty 
was ratified by the Senate, August 6, 1861. 



To the Senate and House of Representatives 1 

July 19, 1861 
To the Senate and House of Representatives: 

As the United States have, in common with Great Britain and 
France, a deep interest in the preservation and developement of the 
fisheries adjacent to the Northeastern coast and Islands of this con- 
tinent, it seems proper that we should concert with the Govern- 
ments of those countries such measures as may be conducive to 
those important objects. With this view, I transmit to Congress a 
copy of a correspondence between the Secretary of State and the 
British Minister here, in which the latter proposes, on behalf of 
his Government, the appointment of a Joint Commission to inquire 
into the matter, in order that such ulterior measures may be 
adopted as may be advisable for the objects proposed. Such legis- 
lation is recommended as may be necessary to enable the Execu- 
tive to provide for a Commissioner on behalf of the United States. 

Washington, igth. July, 1861. ABRAHAM Lnsrcousr 

[453] 



JTTJLY 1Q, l86l 

1 DS, DNA RG 233, Original Executive Document. Referred to the Senate com- 
mittee on foreign relations, the message was reported by Senator Sumner on July 
23 with a recommendation that further consideration be postponed to the first 
Monday in December. 



To William H. Seward 1 

Hon. Sec. of State Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir July 19, 1861 

I wish to see you a moment this morning on a matter of no great 
moment. Will you please call? Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

IALS, RPB. 

To Lorenzo Thomas 1 

July 19, 1861. 

I have agreed, and do agree, that the two Indiana regiments 
named within shall be accepted if the act of Congress shall admit of 
it. Let there be no further question about it. A. 



1 OR, III, I, 339-40; NH, XI, 120. The original letter is missing from the Na- 
tional Archives, but is listed in the register of letters received by the adjutant 
general (DNA WB. RG 94). Robert D. Owen to Cameron, July 20, 1861, enclosed 
a copy of Lincoln's note with the comment, "... I desire to express my regret 
that there should have been any conflict of opinion on this subject, and to add that 
I entirely concur . . . that there should be but one uniform term of enlistment, 
namely, for three years or during the war. I desire further to add that I shall use 
my influence with the Governor to induce him to propose to these regiments to 
enlist on the above terms. . . ." (OR, III, I, 339-40). 



To Elisha WMttlesey 1 

July 19, 1861 

I desire that the Treasury Department will devise a system or 
plan for disbursing the appropriation mentioned within; and if, 
according to said plan, disbursing agents are to be appointed I 
shall be ready to appoint them, on the recommendation of that De- 
partment. In case of Indiana, I am satisfied with Jonathan S. Har- 
vey, 2 named within as disbursing agent A, Lir^rcoLisr 
July 19. 1861. 

1 AES, CSmH. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from Cameron to 
Lincoln, dated July 19, 1861, referring a letter from Elisha Whittlesey, comp- 
troller of the treasury, in regard to the mode of refunding monies advanced by 
the states for equipping Volunteers. Whittlesey recommended and Cameron 

[454] 



JULY 20, l86l 

agreed that the disbursements should be made by agents appointed by the Treas- 
ury instead of by the War Department. 

2 There is no record of Jonathan S. Harvey's appointment as agent of the 
Treasury. 

To Orville BL Browning 1 

Hon. O. H. Browning Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: July 20, 1861 

To-day I send to the Senate the arrangement made through Mr. 
Williams 2 with the Delaware Indians, asking their advice as to 
the making a formal treaty of it, as it already is in substance. On 
very full reflection I have thought this course the safest and best. 
I will thank you if you will move an amendment in about these 
words: "Provided that no part of said lands, shall be patented, 
until the money price for such part shall have been fully paid; 
and provided further that time shall be extended, so that the rights 
of said Railroad Company under the treaty to which this is sup- 
plemental, shall not be forfeited until - 3 

These provisos for the perfect security of the Indians on the one 
hand; and for the benefit of the Co. on the other. The blank you 
will fill of course. Yours as ever A. 



1 ALS, ORB. 

2 Lincoln's old friend Archibald Williams, whom Lincoln had appointed U.S. 
district judge for Kansas. 

3 Lincoln's proposed amendment was expanded to include certain other matters 
and passed the Senate, August 6, 1861. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

July 20, 1861. 
The Secretary of "War has my approbation to sign this letter. 

A. LINCOUNT. 

1 OR, III, I, 339. The letter 'which Lincoln approved was from Cameron to Rep- 
resentative Francis Thomas of Maryland, authorizing organization of four regi- 
ments of loyal citizens ". . . on both sides of the Potomac River from the Monoc- 
acy to the west boundary of Maryland, for the protection of the canal and of 
the property and persons of loyal citizens. . . ." (Ibid., I, 338-39). 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Sec. of War please give this man a hearing. 
July 20 1861 A. LirrcoLis" 

1 Parke-Bernet Catalog 315, November 18-19, 194** No. 325. According to the 
catalog description, Lincoln's endorsement appears on the back of "... a warrant 
appointing J. S. Hill a First Sergeant in the Washington Light Infantry." 

[455] 



To John W. Forney 1 

PRIVATE 

Hon. J. W. Forney Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir July 20. 1861 

There is a young man here by the name of Sympson (Senator 
Browning will give you his Christian name) to whom the giving of 
some place, if in your power, would greatly oblige me. His father 
is one of my best friends whom I have not, so far, been able to 
recognize in any substantial way. Yours very truly 

A. 



1 ALS-P, ISLA. John W. Forney had been elected secretary of the Senate on 
July 15. Orville H. Browning's Diary records on this date, "I ... wrote a note 
to the President to try and get him [Forney] to give Sam Sympson a place." 
Samuel A. Sympson was the son of Lincoln's old friend Alexander Sympson, but 
it seems that an older brother, Coleman C. Sympson, got the job, since the U.S. 
Official Register, 1863, lists "C. C. Simpson of Illinois" as clerk in the Senate. 



To Caleb B. Smith 1 

If the place is vacant, give it to Mr. Coleman, as indicated 
within. A. LINCOLN 

July 20, 1861. 

1 AES, DNA NR KG 48, Applications, Indian Agencies, Box 271. Lincoln's en- 
dorsement is -written on a letter from William P Dole and Caleb B. Smith, July 
19, 1861, recommending Isaac Coleman of Indiana. The U.S. Official Register, 
1863, lists Isaac Coleman as agent for Choctaws. 



Memorandum: John Wilson's Regiment 1 

Let Mr. Wilson bring the Regiment in 40 hours, or if need be, 
in a few hours more. A. LINCOLN 

July 22, 1861 

1 AES, owned by S. H. McVitty, Salem, Virginia. Lincoln's endorsement is 
written on the back of a letter from Wilson, Washington, July 22, 1861, offering 
". . . the services of my head and hands, for any duty in which you may wish 
to employ me* . . . On the 6th. I tendered the services of an efficient Regt. from 
Chicago they are ready & could reach here in 40 hours. . . ." Of several per- 
sons bearing the name "John Wilson" who may have been Lincoln's correspon- 
dent in this instance the best probability seems to be the John Wilson who was 
land agent of the Illinois Central Railroad in Chicago. A letter from Simon Cam- 
eron to Colonel Charles Rnobelsdorf of Chicago, July 22, 1861, accepting the North 
Western Rifle Regiment, later the Forty-fourth Illinois Infantry, suggests that 
this may be the regiment equipped by Wilson (Chicago Tribune,, July 24, 1861). 

[456] 



To Simon Cameron 1 

If there be a vacancy, I desire that C C. Campbell be appointed 
a captain of Artillery. A. LINCOLN 

July 23, 1861. 

1 AES, IHi. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a memorial, July 8, 1861, 
signed by officers at Camp Defiance, Cairo, Illinois, recommending the appoint- 
ment of Charles C. Campbell as captam of artillery in the Regular Army. The 
document also bears Lyman Trumbull's concurrence dated July 23, 1861. Camp- 
bell did not receive the appointment to the Regular Army, but was made major 
of the First Illinois Light Artillery, October 23, 1861. 



Memoranda of Military Policy 
Suggested by the Bull Run Defeat 1 

July 23. 1861. 

1 Let the plan for making the Blockade effective be pushed 
forward with all possible despatch. 

2 Let the volunteer forces at Fort-Monroe & vicinity under 
Genl. Butler be constantly drilled, disciplined, and instructed 
without more for the present. 

3. Let Baltimore be held, as now, with a gentle, but firm, and 
certain hand, 

4 Let the force now under Patterson, or Banks, be strength- 
ened, and made secure in it's possition* 2 

5. Let the forces in Western Virginia act, till further orders, 
according to instructions, or orders from Gen. McClellan. 

6. [Let] Gen. Fremont push forward his organization, and op- 
perations in the West as rapidly as possible, giving rather special 
attention to Missouri. 

7 Let the forces late before Manassas, except the three months 
men, be reorganized as rapidly as possible, in their camps here 
and about Arlington 

8. Let the three months forces, who decline to enter the longer 
service, be discharged as rapidly as circumstances will permit. 

9 Let the new volunteer forces be brought forward as fast as 
possible; and especially into the camps on the two sides of the 
river here. 

July 27, i86i 3 

When the foregoing shall have been substantially attended to 

i. Let Manassas junction, (or some point on one or other of the 

railroads near it;); and Strasburg, be seized, and permanently 

[457] 



JULY 23, l86l 

held, with an open line from Washington to Manassas; and and 
|>c] open line from Harper's Ferry to Strasburg the military 
men to find the way of doing these. 

2. This done, a joint movement from Cairo on Memphis; and 
from Cincinnati on East Tennessee. 

1 AD, DLC-RTL. 

2 The forces operating near Harpers Ferry were not yet under command of 
General Nathaniel P. Banks. The order removing General Robert Patterson from 
command had been issued on July 19, but did not take effect until July 27. Pat- 
terson was held responsible for the defeat at Bull Run by reason of his failure 
to immobilize the Confederate forces under General Joseph E. Johnston. 

3 The memoranda under this date continue on the same page with 8 and 9, 
above. 



Remarks to the Sixty-Ninth New York Regiment 1 

July 23, 1861 

The President and Secretary Seward visited the fortifications 
over the river to-day. Arriving at Fort Corcoran they were received 
by the gallant New York Sixty-ninth with the greatest enthusiasm. 
The President asked if they intended to re-enlist? The reply was 
that "they would if the President desired it." He announced em- 
phatically that he did, and wrote them a letter complimenting them 
upon their brave and heroic conduct, and expressing the hope that 
the whole regiment would re-enlist. 2 This was received with cheers, 
and the determination expressed to go in for the war and stand by 
the government and the old flag forever. 

1 New York Herald, July 24, 1861. 

2 Tlie letter is not of further record. 



To Charles S. Olden 1 

Washington, D.C., 
The Governor of New Jersey: July 24, 1861. 

Sir: Together with the regiments of three-years' volunteers 
which the Government already has in service from your State, 
enough to make eight in all, if tendered in a reasonable time, will 
be accepted, the new regiments to be taken, as far as convenient, 
from the three-months' men and officers just discharged, and to be 
organized, equipped, and sent forward as fast as single regiments 
are ready, on the same terms as were those already in the service 
from that State. Your obedient servant, A. 

[458] 



JULY 25, l86l 
[Endorsement. ] 

This order is entered in the War Department, and the Governor 
of New Jersey is authorized to furnish the regiments with wagons 
and horses. S. CAMERON, Secretary of War. 

i OR, III, I, 365. Governor Olden replied August 3, 1861, that ". . . New 
Jersey will respond as promptly as possible. . . ." (DLC-RTL). 



To Simon Cameron 1 

July 25, 1861 

Let the four Artillery companies which have been in actual serv- 
ice at Cairo for some time, be mustered in regularly for the three 
years service, and so done that they be paid from the begi[nning] 
of their actual ser[vice.] A. Lrrccon.^] 

July 25 [1861] 

1 AES, RPB. Lincoln's endorsement is written on an envelope in which letters 
from Governor Richard Yates and William Thomas, army auditor for Illinois, 
had been delivered to the president. Yates' letter has not been found, but a tele- 
gram which Secretary Seward sent by Lincoln's direction on July 25, informed 
Yates that "Your sixteen regiments of infantry and battalion of artillery will be 
accepted. . . ." (OR, III, I, 349). 



To the House of Representatives 1 

To the House of Representatives: July 25, 1861 

In answer to the resolution of the House of Representatives of the 
i5th instant, requesting a copy of the correspondence between this 
government and foreign powers on the subject of the existing in- 
surrection in the United States, I transmit a report from the Secre- 
tary of State. ABRAHAM LINCOLN. 
Washington, July 25, 1861. 

1 Thirty-seventh Congress, First Session, House of Representatives Executive 
Document No. 12,. Lincoln's communication was accompanied "by one from Sec- 
retary Seward of the same date which deemed it inexpedient "to communicate 
the correspondence called for." 



To the House of Representatives 1 

To the House of Representatives: July 25, 1861 

In answer to the resolution of the House of Representatives of 
the 22d instant, requesting a copy of the correspondence between 

[459] 



JULY 25, l86l 

this government and foreign powers "with reference to maritime 
rights, I transmit a report from the Secretary of State. 

Washington, July 25, 1861. ABRAHAM LINCOLN-. 

1 Thirty-seventh Congress, First Session, House of Representatives Executive 
Document No. 15. Secretary Seward's communication of the same date expressed 
the opinion that ". . . communication of the correspondence called for would 
not at this time comport with the public interest." 

To Winfield Scott 1 

Will Lieut. Genl. Scott please see Professor Lowe 9 once more 
about his balloon? A LINCOLN 

July 25, 1861. 



DNM-Lowe Collection. On June 18, 1861, Professor Thaddeus S. C. 
Lowe of Cincinnati, Ohio, had demonstrated the practicability of using his balloon 
for purposes of military observation, by taking up a telegraph wire and sending 
the president the "first telegram ever dispatched from an aerial station." Al- 
though Lincoln saw' General Scott about the balloon immediately thereafter, the 
general was not enthusiastic, and Lincoln's note was written more than a month 
later. Lowe was later employed by General McClellan to make balloon observa- 
tions of enemy activity. 

To William H. Seward 1 

Hon: Sec. of State July 25, 1861 

Dear Sir The bearer of this wishes to have a son appointed 

consul to Spezia; and if you have no objection, I have none 
July 25. 1861 A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, DNA FS B.G 59, Appointments, Box 370. Lincoln's note is written on 
a letter from Senator James W. Grimes introducing the father of William T. Rice 
of Boston, Massachusetts, who wished his son appointed consul The U.S. Official 
Register, 1861, lists William T. Rice as consul at Spezia. 

To Lorenzo Thomas 1 

July 25, 1861 

If the Adjutant General can get the Regiment together on the 
terms proposed, I think it will be a good corps, and ought to be ac- 
cepted. A. LINCOLN 

July 25, 1861. 

1 AES, owned by L. E. Dicke, Evanston, Illinois. Lincoln's endorsement is 
written on the back of a letter from Charles B. Stuart of Elmira, New York, writ- 
ten from Washington, July 23, offering to organize a regiment of engineers and 
mechanics. The regiment was authorized on September 20 as the Fiftieth New 
York Infantry and was designated Fiftieth New York Engineers on October 22 
1861. 

[460] 



To the War Department 1 

[c.July 25, 1861?] 

Col. Wallace, bearer of this, commands one o the Illinois Regi- 
ments, just ordered to be received, wishes a copy of the order to 
take to Illinois. Please let him have it. A. 



1 AL.S, IHi. Lincoln's note is written on the "back of a card bearing Ward H. 
Lamon's note "To the door keeper at White House. This will be handed you by 
Major Wallace of Ills, one of Mr Lincolns best friends. Show him at once to Mr. 
Lincoln's room if you can do so. Ward H. Lamon." William H. L. Wallace's reg- 
iment, the Eleventh Illinois, was mustered July 25, 1861, 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Secretary of War Executive Mansion 

Dear Sir July 26, 1861. 

Please let Reuben B. Hatch of Illinois, be appointed an Assistant 
Quartermaster, and assigned to the Brigade of General Prentiss, in 
Illinois. 

Also let Speed Butler of Illinois be appointed Commissary of Sub- 
sistence, and assigned to the Brigade of General Pope, in Illinois 

Your obedient Servant ABRABL\M 



1 LS, IHi. Reuben B. Hatch of Meredosia, Illinois, brother of Ozias M. Hatch, 
was appointed assistant quartermaster of Volunteers with rank of captain, Au- 
gust 3, 1861. Speed Butler, son of Lincoln's old friend William Butler, was ap- 
pointed commissary of subsistence, August 3, 1861, and on September i, became 
major of the Fifth Illinois Cavalry. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

July 26, 1861 

Lewis E. Johnson, desires to be a Paymaster of Volunteers. He is 
the son of Hon. Reverdy Johnson who much desires the appoint- 
ment A. Lusrcoiaisr. 

July 26, 1861. 

I wish this to be done when the time comes. A.L. 

1 Newark Galleries Catalog 128, December 5, 1930, No. 156. Lewis (Louis) E. 
Johnson was nominated additional paymaster July 31 to rank from June i, 1861, 

To the House of Representatives 1 

To the House of Representatives: July 27, 1861 

In answer to the resolution of the House of Representatives of the 
24th instant, asking the grounds, reasons, and evidence upon which 

[461] 



JULY 27 9 l86l 

the police commissioners of Baltimore were arrested, and are now 
detained as prisoners at Fort McHenry, I have to state that it is 
judged to be incompatible with the public interest at this time to 
furnish the information called for by the resolution. 

Washington, July 27, 1861. ABRAHAM LINCOLN. 

1 Thirty-seventh Congress, First Session, House of Representatives Executive 
Document No. 16. The arrest of the police commissioners of Baltimore for seces- 
sion activities was ordered by Wmfield Scott, June 24, 1861 (OR, I, II, 138-39). 

Memorandum : 
Appointment of Walter D. Mclndoe 1 

[c.July 27, 1861] 

Wisconsin Delegation propose that the nomination of Henry 
Martin, as Sup. Ind. Affs. be withdrawn; and Walter D. Mclndoe, 
of Wis be substituted. 

1 AE, DNA NR RG 48, Applications, Indian Agencies, Utah, Box 1267. Lin- 
coln's memorandum is written on the back of a letter of July 27, 1861, signed by 
Senator James R. Doolittle, Senator Timothy O. Howe, and Representative John 
F. Potter, recommending the change in appointment. James D. Doty of Wisconsin 
is listed in the U S. Official Register, 1861, as superintendent of Indian affairs for 
Utah. 

To the Senate 1 

July 27, 1861 

To the Senate: In answer to the resolution of the Senate of the 
25th instant, relative to the instructions to the ministers of the 
United States abroad, in reference to the rebellion now existing in 
the southern portion of the Union, I transmit a report from the 
Secretary of State. ABRAHAM: Liisrcorjsr. 

Washington, July 27, 1861. 

1 Thirty-seventh Congress, First Session, Senate Executive Document No. 5. 
Secretary Seward's accompanying communication of the same date declared that 
". . . it is not deemed expedient to communicate the instructions called for." 

To Simon Cameron 1 

The within are good recommendations, & I respectfully submit 
the case to the Sec. of War. A. LnsrcoiJNr 

July 29, 1861. 

1 AES, DLC-Cameron Papers. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of 
the last of several letters recommendmg that William M. Este, a native of Ohio 
and citizen of San Francisco, California, be granted a commission. Este was ap- 
pointed second lieutenant in the Twenty-sixth Ohio Infantry, December 17, 1861. 

[462] 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War. Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir July 29, 1861 

I understand that by an existing law, there is to be a Paymaster 
for every two regiments of volunteers. With this understanding I 
wish to appoint Valentine C. Hanna of Indiana one of these Pay- 
masters; and that it be done at once, or put on a list so that it will 
certainly be done in due course. Yours truly A. 



1 ALS, CSmH. Valentine C. Hanna was appointed additional paymaster, Au- 
gust 15, 1861. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: July 29. 1861 

At various times certain men have been named as Brigadier Gen- 
erals of Volunteers, and most of whom have already been acting in 
that capacity. As the Volunteer bill is now a law, I will thank you 
to send me blank nominations of them to be laid before the Senate. 
So far as I can remember, they are Pope and Hurlbut of Ills: Rey- 
nolds of la. 2 Curtis of Iowa, Cox and Schenck of Ohio, McCall of 
Penn. and Kearney, of New- Jersey and there may be others not 
recollected by me, whose names your records will show. Butler, 
Banks and Dix also were named as Major Generals of Volunteers; 
and their nominations should also be sent* Let them, in the nomina- 
tions, be designated as of Volunteers without assigning them to any 
particular corps, or States. 

I am not sure whether Lyons was appointed for volunteers or for 
regulars. McClellan, Fremont, Anderson & Rosecrantz, were ap- 
pointed for regulars; and I think their nominations are already 
before the Senate. Yours truly A. LUNTCOUNT 

1 ALS, DLC-Cameron Papers. Cameron's letter to Lincoln, July 29, 1861, cor- 
roborated the fact that nominations for McClellan, Fremont, Mansfield, Mc- 
Dowell, Anderson, and Rosecrans for the Regular Army had already been sent 
to the Senate, and promised to attend to the others (DLC-RTL) . The nominations 
of Major Generals Nathaniel P Banks, John A. Dix, and Benjamin F. Butler; 
Brigadier Generals Nathaniel Lyon, John Pope, George A. McCall, Samuel R. 
Curtis, Philip Kearny, Joseph J. Reynolds, Rufus King, Jacob D. Cox, Stephen A. 
Hurlbut, Franz Sigel, Robert C. Schenck, and Benjamin M. Prentiss all to the 
Volunteers were sent to the Senate July 29, with appointments dating from May 
16, 1861, for the first three named, and May 17 for the others. 

2 Abbreviation for Indiana. 

[463] 



To Simon Cameron 1 

July 29, 1861 
If it i$ possible to furnish 5000 stand of Arms to the State Govt. 

at Wheeling, without endangering other points too much, let it be 

done. 

The bearer of this an intelligent gentleman from there, whom 

please see a moment A. LINCOLN 

July 29. 1861 

l AES, DLC-RTL Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from John S. 
Carlile introducing James W. Paxton and Daniel Lamb of Wheeling, Virginia. 
Thomas A. Scott, acting secretary of war, informed Carlile, August 6, 1861, that 
". . . 2,000 rifled arms were ordered ... to Western Virginia. . . . One thou- 
sand of the arms ... to be delivered to J. W. Paxton and Daniel Lamb. . . ." 
(OB, HI, I, 389). 



To Hannibal Hamlin 1 

Hon: H. Hamlin, Executive Office, 

President of the Senate July 2Qth 1861 

Sir, I transmit, herewith, to be laid before the Senate, for its con- 
stitutional action thereon, Articles of agreement, and convention 
with accompanying papers. ABRAHAM LINCOLN 

1 DS, DNA RG 46, Senate 376 Get. The treaty with the Arapahoe and Chey- 
enne Indians was amended and ratified by the Senate, August 6, 1861. 



To the Kentucky Delegation in Congress 1 

Executive Mansion July 29, 1861. 

Gentlemen of the Kentucky delegation, who are for the Union 
I somewhat wish to authorize my friend Jesse Bayles to raise a Ken- 
tucky Regiment; but I do not wish to do it without your consent. If 
you consent, please write so, at the bottom of this. Yours truly 

A. LINCOLN 

I repeat, I would like for Col. Bayles to raise a Regiment of Cav- 
alry, whenever the Union men of Kentucky desire, or consent to it. 
Aug. 5. 1861. A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, The Rosenbach Company, Philadelphia and New York. On the bottom 
of the letter is the delegation's endorsement, "We consent " signed by Repre- 
sentatives Robert Mallory, Henry Grider, George W. Dunlap, James S. Jackson, 
and Charles A. Wickliffe. Lincoln's endorsement of August 5 is written on the 
verso. Jesse Bayles organized the Fourth Kentucky Cavalry at Louisville and 
served as colonel until April 14, 1863. 

[464] 



To the Senate 1 

July 30, 1861 

To the Senate of the United States: In answer to the resolution of 
the Senate of the igth instant, requesting information concerning 
the quasi armistice alluded to in my message of the 4th instant, I 
transmit a report from the Secretary of the Navy. 

July 30, 1861. ABRAHAM LmcoLisr. 

1 Thirty-seventh Congress, First Session, Senate Executive Document No. 7. 
The accompanying communication from Gideon Welles of the same date, reported 
that ". . . it is believed the communication of the information called for would 
not, at this time, comport with the public interest*" The Senate resolution of July 
19 requested the president to communicate ". . . the character of the quasi armi- 
stice ... by reason of which the commander of the frigate Sabine refused to 
transfer the United States troops into Fort Pickens, in obedience to his or- 
ders. . . ." (Senate Journal^ July 19, 1861, p. 62). Captain Henry A. Adams in 
command of the Sabine had refused to follow an order issued by Winfield Scott 
to Captain Israel Vogdes in command of troops sent to reinforce Fort Pickens, on 
the grounds that he (Adams) had not received orders from his superiors (i.e., the 
Navy), and on the further grounds that an agreement was still in existence be- 
tween the U.S. Government and the state of Florida, not to reinforce Fort Pickens. 
The purported agreement was negotiated prior to Lincoln's inauguration and 
the secession of Florida, and was in fact merely a temporary verbal agreement 
and not a signed armistice. An order from Secretary Welles, sent by Lieutenant 
John L. Worden of the Navy, finally reached Adams, and Fort Pickens was re- 
inforced on the night of April 12. Worden was arrested on his return trip by land 
and held by the Confederacy until an exchange of prisoners brought his release 
seven months later. 

To the Senate 1 

July 30, 1861 

To the Senate of the United States: In answer to the resolution 
of the Senate of the 23d instant, requesting information concerning 
the imprisonment of Lieut. John J. Worden [John L. Worden] 2 
of the United States navy, I transmit a report from the Secretary of 
the Navy. ABRAHAM: LINCOLN. 

July 30, 1861. 

1 Thirty-seventh Congress, First Session, Senate Executive Document No. 6. 
The accompanying communication from. Gideon Welles of July 29, 1861, reported 
that ". . . communication of the information called for would not, at this time, 
comport with the public interest." See also Lincoln's message, supra and note. 

2 Brackets are in the source. 

To John C. Fremont 1 

July 31, 1861 

The "writer of the within I personally know to be a most reliable 
man, both for integrity and judgment; and as the matters he speaks 

[465] 



JTULY 31, 1861 

of are in Gen. Fremont's field, I submit them to him asking his spe- 
cial attention to the [sic*] them. A. LUNTCOLIST 

July 31, 1861 

1 AES, DLC-RTL. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from Colonel 
John M. Palmer, Headquarters, Fourteenth Regiment of Illinois Volunteers, Stur- 
geon, Missouri, July 24, 1861, to Senator Lyman Trumbull. Palmer reported 
many secessionists in the area and recommended organizing and arming the 
loyal citizens. Lincoln forwarded Palmer's letter to Fremont, and Fremont re- 
turned it enclosed with his reply, August 5, that the ". . . plan suggested ... is 
about what Genl Fremont has been doing. . . ." (DLC-RTL). 

Memorandum : 
Appointment of Thomas H. Dudley 1 

July 31, 1861 

It is said Mr. Dudley is acting as Vice-Consul at Paris, & would 
lite to remain awhile. Let us remember this whenever we think of 
appointing a Consul to Paris. A.L. 

July 31. 1861 

1 AES, DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 276. Lincoln's endorsement is 
written on a letter from John T. Nixon and others, undated, requesting that 
Thomas H. Dudley of Camden, New Jersey, be allowed to remain in Paris until 
his health was restored. Dudley was nominated consul at Liverpool, December 
23, 1861, and confirmed by the Senate, February 19, 1862. 

To United States Marshals 1 

July 31, 1861 

The Marshal of the United States in the vicinity of forts -where 
political prisoners are held, will supply decent lodging and subsist- 
ence for such prisoners unless they shall prefer to provide in those 
respects for themselves, in which cases they will be allowed to do 
so by the commanding officers in charge. 

Approved, and the Secretary of State will transmit the order, to 
Marshals, the Lieutenant General, and Secretary of the Interior. 
31 July 1861. ABRAHAM: 



1 Copy, DNA WR RG 94, Adjutant General, Letters Received, P 878. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Executive Mansion, August 1 9 1861. 

My dear Sir: Herewith I enclose you a resolution of the Senate 
inquiring whether Hon. James H. Lane, of Kansas, has been ap- 

[466] 



AUGUST 1, l86l 

pointed a general in the army of the United States; and if yea, 
whether he has accepted the appointment. Will you please furnish 
me, as soon as possible, copies of all record entries and correspond- 
ence upon the subject which are in your department, together with 
a brief statement of your personal knowledge of whatever may con- 
tribute to a free 2 and fair statement of the case? Yours truly, 
Hon. Secretary of War. A. LUNTCOOST. 

1 Thirty-seventh Congress, First Session, Senate Executive Document No. 8. 
The original letter is missing (DNA WR RG 107). As printed in Senate Execu- 
tive Document No. 8, it is No. 2 of the several documents transmitted by Lincoln, 
on August 5 in response to the Senate resolution of July 31. See Lincoln to the 
Senate, August 5, infra. 2 NH, VI, 337, reads "full" instead of "free." 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Gen." Mansfield wishes Charles H. Hosmer to he a 2nd. Lieut.; 
and so let it be done. A. LiisrcoxjNr 

Aug. i, 1861. 

1 ALS, DLC-Cameron Papers. Charles H. Hosmer of Illinois was nominated 
to the Senate as second lieutenant in the First Infantry on August and con- 
firmed August 5, 1861. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Let the within named be a Pay-Master of Volunteers if a place 
for him can be found A. L 

Aug. i, 1861 

1 AES, IHi. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a recommendation, signed by 
eight Illinois congressmen, for George Phelps of Fulton County, Illinois. Phelps 
was nominated paymaster on August 2 and confirmed by the Senate on August 5, 
1861. 



To the Senate 1 

To the Senate of the United States. August i, 1861 

I submit herewith for consideration, with a view to ratification, 
a Postal Convention between the United States of America and the 
United Mexican States, concluded by their respective Plenipoten- 
tiaries on the 3 ist. ultimo. ABRAHAM LINCOLN 
Washington i August 1861 

1 DS, DNA RG 46, Senate 376 Bio. The treaty was ratified without amend- 
ment on August 6, 1861. 

[467] 



To the Tycoon of Japan 1 

August i, 1861 
Abraham Lincoln, President of the United States of America. 

To His Majesty the Tycoon of Japan. 

Great and Good Friend: I have received the letter which you 
have addressed to me on the subject of a desired extension of the 
time stipulated by Treaty for the opening of certain ports and cities 
in Japan. The question is surrounded with many difficulties. While 
it is my earnest desire to consult the convenience of Your Majesty 
and to accede so far as I can to your reasonable wishes so kindly 
expressed, the interests of the United States must, nevertheless, 
have due consideration. Townsend Harris, Minister Resident near 
Your Majesty, will be fully instructed as to the views of this Gov- 
ernment, and will make them known to you at large. I do not per- 
mit myself to doubt that these views will meet with Your Majesty's 
approval, for they proceed not less from a just regard for the in- 
terest and prosperity of your Empire than from considerations 
affecting our own welf are and honor. 

Wishing abundant prosperity and length of years to the great 
State over which you preside, I pray God to have Your Majesty al- 
ways in His safe and holy keeping. 

Written at the City of Washington this first day of August, 1861. 
Your Good Friend, ABRAHAM: LUNTCOLTST. 

By the President: 

WILLIAM H. SEWAB.D, Secretary of State. 

1 Copy, DNA FS RG 59, Communications to Foreign Sovereigns and States, III, 
176-77. Secretary Seward's communication to the ministers of foreign affairs of 
the Tycoon on the same date calls attention to the fact that "The subject, however, 
has "been complicated "by the yet unpunished and unatoned homicide of Mr. 
Heusken, our late Secretary of Legation. You must be aware that the first ele- 
ment of national fraternity is the safety of the persons charged with the con- 
duct of their mutual intercourse and relations. 1 " (Ibid.*). Henry C. J. Heusken of 
New York had been assassinated January 14, 1861. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

August 2, 1861 

Maj. Genl Butler is empowered to raise a brigade of not exceeding 
five thousand men with the proper proportions of artillery and 
mounted men and the same troops to organise and equip and arm 
with such serviceable arms as he may deem fit provided the expense 
shall not exceed the expense paid by the United States for like 
equipment or Material for like troops and provided the Secretary 
of War concurs in this. A. 

Aug. 2 1861 

[468] 



AUGUST 2, l86l 

1 DS-P, ISLA. This document is m Benjamin F. Butler's handwriting with the 
exception of "and provided the Secretary of War concurs in this," and the signa- 
ture. Butler's authorization from the War Department did not come, however, 
until September 12. See the draft of an order authorizing Butler to raise a Vol- 
unteer force, September o, and Lincoln's telegram to the New England Gov- 
ernors, September 11, infra. 



To John C. Fremont 1 

To Major Genl. Fremont, Washington, August 2d 1861. 

Godfrey Aigner, M.D. has been selected by the Sanitary Com- 
mission to visit the camps of a portion of your department, to re- 
port upon circumstances affecting their health, and to advise the 
officers in regard to means for sustaining and improving the sani- 
tary condition of their men. As Doctor Aigner will only act con- 
sistently with the strictest rules of military discipline, and as it 
will be his duty to sustain your authority and meet your wishes in 
all respects, your countenance, aid and support is confidently re- 
quested to be extended to him, in facilitating his movements and 
strengthening his influence. Yours truly A. 



1 LS, owned by Charles W. Olsen, Chicago, Illinois. Dr. Godfrey Aigner of 
New York was one of six special commissioners assigned by the Sanitary Com- 
mission to inspect military camps. 



To the House of Representatives 1 

To the House of Representatives: August 2, 1861 

In answer to the resolution of the House of Representatives of 
yesterday, requesting information regarding the imprisonment of 
loyal citizens of the United States by the forces now in rebellion 
against this Government, I transmit a report from the Secretary of 
State, and the copy of a telegraphic despatch by which it was ac- 
companied. ABRAHAM: LUSTCOLKT. 
Washington, ad. Augt., 1861. 

1 DS, DNA RG 233, Original Executive Documents, Thirty-seventh Congress, 
First Session, No. 17. Seward to Lincoln, August 2, 1861, notified the president 
that the only information he had on the subject was the telegram which he en- 
closed, as follows: "(Received August i, 1861. From Richmond, Va., July 31.) I 
am here a prisoner. Ely, Arnold Harris, and McGraw are also here. C. Huson, 
Jr." According to the New York Times, July 29, 1861, Arnold Harris, ex-publisher 
of the Washington, D. C. States, and Henry S. Magraw of Pennsylvania, had 
gone to Bull Run to recover the body of Colonel James Cameron of the Seventy- 
ninth New York, brother of Simon Cameron. Representative Alfred Ely of New 
York who had gone out to watch the battle was captured and held for six months. 
C. Huson, Jr., was probably the son of Calvin Huson of New York, a commis- 
sioner in the State Department. 

[469] 



To the Senate 1 

To the Senate of the United States August 2, 1861 

The Resolution of your Honorable body which is herewith re- 
turned, has been submitted to the Secretary of Navy, who has made 
the Report upon it, which I have the honor to inclose herewith. 

I have the honor to add that the same rule stated by the Secretary 
of the Navy, is found in Section 5 of the Army Regulations pub- 
lished in 1861. It certainly is competent for Congress to change this 
rule by law; but it is respectfully suggested that a rule of so long 
standing, and of so extensive application, should not be hastily 
changed; nor by any authority less than the full law-making 
power. ABRAHAM LINCOLN 

August 2. 1861. 

i ADS, DNA RG 46, Thirty-seventh Congress, First Session, Senate 3/B A6, 
Box 9. The Senate resolution directed that the nominations of a list of second 
lieutenants in the Marine Corps be returned to the president and that ". . . the 
Senate are of opinion that rank and position in the Army, Navy, or Marine Corps 
should not be left to be decided by lot, but that, all other things being equal, pref- 
erence should be given to age." {Executive Journal,, July 31, p. 493). Secretary 
Welles replied that according to Army and Navy regulations "... questions re- 
specting the rank of officers arising from the sameness of dates in commissions of 
the same grade shall be decided .... by lottery among such as have not been 
in the military service of the United States." (Ibid, August 3, p. 527). Senator 
Hale from the committee on Naval Affairs reported August 5, that Secretary 
Welles* citation of regulations ". . . has not the slightest reference to the case 
under consideration. . . ." because the regulation applied only to ". . . officers 
of different regiments or corps. It is not to be resorted to, then, until the other 
tests provided are exhausted, but between officers of the same date of the same 
regiment or corps the order of appointment prevails. It is believed that this order 
of appointment has never . . . been fixed by lot, and if it shall be allowed in 
the present instance . . . will be of the most demoralizing character. . . ." 
(Ibid., p. 548). But Senator Hale's resolution to send a copy of the report to the 
president was voted down. 

To Hamilton R. Gamble 1 

August 3, 1861 

To His Excellency H R Gamble Govr of Missouri Jefferson City 
In reply to your message directed to the President I am directed 
to say that If, 2 by a proclamation, you promise security to citizens 
in arms who voluntarily return to their allegiance, and become 
peaceable, and loyal, this government will, cause the promise to be 
respected. SIMON CAMERON 

War Deptmt Secy of War 

Washington Aug 3, 1861 

1 ADf, DLC-Cameron Papers. Hamilton R. Gamble had been inaugurated 
governor of Missouri on July 31. On August 5, he issued a proclamation that 

[470] 



AUGUST 5, l86l 

". . . If those citizens, who at the call of the late Governor have taken up arms, 
choose to return voluntarily to their homes . . . they will find in the present 
Executive a determination to afford them all the security in his power. . . ." 
(New York Tribune, August 6, 1861). Although Cameron's message, composed 
in part by Lincoln, appears in the Tribune along with the proclamation, Gamble's 
message directed to the president has not been located. 

2 The draft in the Cameron Papers has the remainder of this sentence in Lin- 
coln's autograph. 

To Thomas A. Scott 1 

Executive Mansion, 
Hon. Asst. Secretary of War. Aug. 3, 1861. 

Gen'l Scroggs of New York wishes to raise a military corps for 
service of the government and I shall be satisfied with any arrange- 
ment you may make with him at the department on the subject. 
Yours very truly, A. 



1 Tracy, p. 191. Thomas A. Scott of Pennsylvania had "been nominated assist- 
ant secretary of war, August 3, 1861. Brigadier General Gustavus A. Scroggs of 
the New York Militia was authorized to recruit a regiment known as the Fourth 
Regiment, Eagle Brigade. It was not fully recruited and when the troops were 
transferred to the Seventy-eighth New York Infantry, Scroggs was not trans- 
ferred or com missioned. 

To William H. Seward 1 

I wish the applicant within named to have a $1500 consulate; and, 
if possible, to be within the German States. A.L. 

Aug. 3. 1861. 

1 AES, IDNA FS R.G 59, Appointments, Box 332. Lincoln's endorsement is 
written on the hack of a brief of papers recommending Jacob T. Lockhart, secre- 
tary of the Republican state committee of Indiana, for an unspecified consulate. 
Lockhart received no consulate, but is listed in the U.S. Official Register 9 1861, as 
Indian agent of the Nevada superintendency. 

To Edward Bates 1 

Hon. Attorney General Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: August 5. 1861 

As you are anxious that Fletcher M. Haight shall be Jud [g] e of 
the Southern District of California, send me the nomination. 2 Also, 
at the request of the Wisconsin members, I conclude that Joseph G. 
Knapp shall be an Associate Justice in New-Mexico, in place of 
- Blackwood. 3 Yours truly A. Liisrco:oxr 

1 ALS-P, ISLA, 

2 Fletcher M. Haight's nomination was sent to the Senate on August 5. 

3 Joseph G. Knapp was appointed in place of William G. Blackwood. See 
memorandum c. July 15, supra, 

[471] 



To Simon Cameron 1 

[c. August 5, 1861] 

Mr. John A. Ford, as is seen by the within papers is or was well 
recommended by his neighbors for post master at Petersburg. The 
change of sentiment since then has driven him from his home and 
he now seeks the appointment of second lieutenant in the army. I 
hope it can be conveniently given him. A. LINCOLN. 

Unless there is some confusion not known to me let Mr. Ford be 
appointed. A.L. 

1 Copy, ISLA. The copies of Lincoln's endorsements are undated, but on Au- 
gust 5, Lincoln nominated John A. Ford of Virginia for appointment as first 
lieutenant in the Thirteenth Infantry, and the Senate confirmed the appoint- 
ment the same day. In addition to Lincoln's endorsements, Ford's papers carry 
an endorsement by Winfleld Scott as follows: "Mr. Ford served honorably in 
the Mexican War"; and by Cameron as follows: "General Thomas Please ap- 
point for it." 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir August 5. 1861 

Col. John M. Wallace, commanding a Regiment, 2 now at 
Harper's Ferry, has become unable to ride a horse; and therefore 
his friends wish him to be a Paymaster; and I too, think it ought to 
be done. 

Could you not also put in George A. Mitchell, for a Paymaster- 
ship; as even then, Indiana will not have a large share. Yours truly 

A. 



1 AL.S, IHi. John M. "Wallace and George A. Mitchell were both appointed 
paymasters on August 5, 1861. 

2 Lincoln wrote and deleted "recently at Cumberland" at this point. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Would it not be as well to appoint James Cooper, Brigadier Gen- 
eral, & B. W. Perkins Quarter-Master, as Cooper recommends? 
Aug. 5. 1861 A. LINCOLN 

1 AES, RPB, Lincoln's endorsement is written on the envelope enclosing Coop- 
er's letter to Benjamin W. Perkins of August i, and Cooper's letter to Cameron 
dated August 6, 1861. Cooper, in command of Maryland troops since May 11, 
1861, was nominated to the Senate December 6, 1861, as brigadier general of 
Volunteers, his commission to date from May 17, 1861, and was confirmed by 
the Senate February 3, 1862. Benjamin W. Perkins was nominated to the Senate 
on the same date but was rejected on February 10, 1862. 

[472] 



To Simon Cameron* 

The within is reliable, & I ask respectful attention to it. 
Aug. 5, 1861. A L. 

1AES, owned by Richard F. LufMn, Boston, Massachusetts. Lincoln's 
endorsement is written on the back of a letter from James C. Conkling, recom- 
mending that a regiment raised by William O. Jones in Sangamon, Morgan, 
Scott, and Menard counties in Illinois, be accepted. William O. Jones resigned 
as lieutenant colonel of the Forty-sixth Illinois Infantry shortly after it was 
mustered in December, 1861. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

It appears to me that the appointment within recommended, 
would be proper; but I refer it to the Secretary of War. 
Aug. 5, 1861 A. 



1 AES, IHi. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from Montgomery 
Blair, August 5, 1861, endorsed in concurrence by Edward Bates and others, 
recommending Captain Amos F. Garrison of Missouri, formerly of the Com- 
missary Department, for appointment as commissary in the Army of the 
United States. Garrison was appointed captain and commissary of Volunteers 
on August 7, 1861. 

Memorandum : 
Appointment of Edward E. Sharp 1 

When the time comes, this appointment ought to be made. 
Aug. 5. 1861. A. L 

l AES, DNA WE. RG 94, U.S. Military Academy, 1861, No. 750, Box 79. Lin- 
coln's endorsement is "written on a letter from Representative James S. Rollins of 
Missouri, August 4, 1861, recommending Edward E. Sharp for appointment at 
large to "West Point. Although Lincoln again endorsed the appointment on Jan- 
uary 27, 1862, as "A very strong case," no appointment was made. 

To the Senate 1 

August 5, 1861 

To the Senate of the United States: In answer to the resolution of 
your honorable body of date July 31, 1861, requesting the President 
to inform the Senate whether the Hon. James H. Lane, a member 
of that body from Kansas., has been appointed a brigadier general 
in the army of the United States, and if so, whether he has accepted 
such appointment, I have the honor to transmit herewith certain 
papers, numbered i, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7, which, taken together, ex- 
plain themselves, and which contain all the information I possess 

[473] 



AUGUST 6 9 l86l 

upon the questions propounded. It was my intention, as shown by 
my letter of June 20, 1861, to appoint Hon. James H. Lane, of Kan- 
sas, a brigadier general of United States volunteers, in anticipation 
of the act of Congress, since passed, for raising such volunteers; and 
I have no further knowledge upon the subject, except as derived 
from the papers herewith enclosed. ABRAHAM LINCOLN. 

Executive Mansion, August 5, 1861. 

1 Thirty-seventh Congress, First Session, Senate Executive Document No. 8. 
The original cannot be located (DNA WR RG 46) . The papers transmitted by 
Lincoln are printed in Senate Executive Document No. 8 as follows: i. copy of 
the Senate resolution of July 31; 2. Lincoln to Cameron, August i (vide supra} 
3. copy of Lincoln to Cameron, June 20 (vide supra) ; 4. copy of Lorenzo Thomas 
to Lincoln, July 15, informing the president that the letter of appointment for 
Lane directed on June 20 had been sent to Lincoln for signature but had not been 
returned; 5. copy of Lorenzo Thomas to Lane, July 26, reminding Lane that he 
has not signified his acceptance of the appointment; 6. Lane to Thomas, July 28, 
notifying that when the Kansas Brigade is organized and he learns their wishes 
as to a commander he will signify his acceptance or non-acceptance. 



To Rufus F. Andrews 1 

Hon. Rufus F. Andrews Washington, 

My dear Sir: August 6, 1861 

Mr. James Morss, wishes to be Deputy-Surveyor at New- York. I 
do not know him personally, except for the last few days; but the 
testimonials he has presented interest me enough for him, to induce 
me to ask for him a fair and careful consideration of his case. Yours 
very truly A. LiKrcoLr* 

1 AILS, Munson- Williams-Proctor Institute, Utica, New York. James Morss is 
not listed as appointed in the U.S. Official Register, 1861. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

August 6, 1861. 

.... Let these appointments be sent me immediately, unless 
there be some objection not known to me. 

1 The Collector, July- August, 1946, J 1488. The description accompanying this 
fragmentary text indicates that Lincoln's letter asked appointments for Samuel 
Simmons of Missouri; Joseph S. York, Bradford R. Wood, Jr., and Charles A. 
Place of New York; and Merritt H. Insley of Kansas. All were appointed as fol- 
lows: Simmons, captain and commissary of subsistence of Volunteers, August 
29; York, captain Fifteenth U.S. Infantry, August 29; Wood, first lieutenant 
Forty-fourth New York Infantry, August 30; Place, second lieutenant Fifteenth 
New York Engineers, August 27; Insley, captain and assistant quartermaster of 
Volunteers, August 6, 1861. 

[474] 



To William H. SewarcT 

Hon. Sec. of State Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir August 6. 1861 

Theodore D. Edwards, on good recommendations was appointed 
Attorney for Colorado Territory, and declines it. 

He is a Kentuckian, and declines the office; and asks to be Con- 
sul to Demarara. 

I do not find an applicant for it on our list; and I do not object 
to his having it. Yours truly A. LIWCOUNT. 

1 ALS, NAuE. See Lincoln to Seward, September 17, infra. 

To Edward Bates 1 

Atty. Genl. please preserve these. 
Aug. 7, 1861 A L. 

1 AES, InFtwL. Lincoln's endorsement is -written on a recommendation of 
certain Kentucky congressmen, dated July 31, 1861, for the appointment of Jere- 
miah T. Boyle as U.S. district judge in Kentucky. Boyle was not appointed to 
a judgeship, but became a brigadier general of Volunteers on November 9, 1861. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Secretary of War Executive Mansion, Aug. 7. 1861 

My dear Sir: The within paper, as you see, is by Hon. John S. 
Phelps, and Hon. Frank P. Blair Jr. both members of the present 
Congress from Missouri. The object is to get up an efficient force 
of Missourians in the South Western part of the State. It ought to 
be done; and Mr. Phelps ought to have general Superintendence of 
it. I see by a private report to me from the Department, that 18 
regiments are already accepted from Missouri. 2 Can it not be ar- 
ranged that part of them (not yet organized, as I understand) may 
be taken from the locality mentioned, and put under the control of 
Mr. Phelps? And let him have discretion to accept them for a 
shorter term than three years, or the war; understanding, however 
that he will get them for the full term if he can. I hope this can 
be done, because Mr. Phelps is too zealous & efficient; and under- 
stands his ground too well for us to lose his service. Of course pro- 
vision for arming, equiping &c. must be made. Mr. Phelps is here, 
& wishes to carry home with him, authority for this matter. Yours 
truly A. Lnxrcousr 

1 ALS-F, American Art Association Catalog, February 20-21, 1928, No. 258. 
John S. Phelps of Springfield, Missouri, and Francis P. Blair, Jr., wrote Lincoln 
on August 6, 1861, recommending that additional troops be raised in Missouri, 
enlisted for six months if desirable, to ". . . repel the threatened invasions . . . 

[475] 



AU GTJST 7, l86l 

to invade Arkansas, and ... to keep the Indians west of that state in subjec- 
tion. . . ." (OR, I, III, 430). Thomas A. Scott to Phelps, August 8, 1861, author- 
ized ". . . five regiments of infantry and one ... of cavalry for six months, or 
. . . the duration of the war. . . ." (Ibid^ III, I, 39^). 

2 Thomas A. Scott to Lincoln, August 3, 1861 (DLC-RTL). 

To Simon Cameron 1 

August 7, 1861 

Gov. Koerner, who proposes within to raise additional forces for 
us, is one of the most reliable of men. If the Department can safely 
promise to take the troops, it can be done with as much reliance on 
Gov. Koerner, as on any other man. A LINCOLN 

Aug. 7. 1861 

1 Stan. V. Henkels Catalog, May 19, 1925, No. 142. Lincoln's endorsement is 
described as written on the back of a letter from Trumbull to Lincoln, dated Au- 
gust 7, 1861, forwarding and endorsing Koerner's offer to raise more German 
regiments. See Lincoln to Koerner, August 8, infra. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: August 7, 1861 

Senator Lane, of Kansas -wishes appointments for Kansas volun- 
teers as follow. 

A. C. Wilder, to be Assist. Com. of Subsistence. 2 
Dr. Rufus Gilpatrick, to be a Brigade Surgeon 3 
Henry /. Adams, to be a Paymaster 4 
Dr. W. W. Updegraff y to be a Paymaster 5 

I am satisfied that these appointments be made. A. LINCOLN 

* ALS-P, ISLA. 2 A. Carter Wilder was appointed August 7, 1861. 

3 No record of the appointment of Rufus Gilpatrick has been found, but several 
references to his service in connection with an expedition into Indian territory 
occur in the Official Records. He was tilled at "Webber's Falls, Cherokee Nation, 
April 25, 1863, while dressing wounds of a Confederate soldier. 

4 Henry J. Adams was appointed September 5, 1861. 

5 w. W. UpdegrafFs appointment is not of record, but he served later as first 
lieutenant, Third Brigade of Kansas Militia. 

Designation of William E Dole to Present 
Treaty to the Delaware Indians 1 

Washington, August 7. 1861 

I designate William P. Dole, Commissioner of Indian Afa[i]rs, 
to present the treaty, as amended, mentioned above, to the Indians 2 
for their acceptance; and to take such acceptance, if freely given, 

[476] 



AUGUST 7, l86l 

with the signatures of said Indians; 3 and to certify his proceedings 
herein to the Executive. ABRAHAM ~ 



1 AES, DNA FS RG 11, General Records, No. 317, Treaty with the Delaware* 
at Leavenworth City, Kansas, July 2, 1861. Lincoln's endorsement is written on 
the bottom of the copy of the Senate resolution amending and ratifying the 
treaty, August 6, 1861. 

2 "Through their chiefs & Head men" inserted at this point in another hand. 

3 Semicolon changed to comma and "chiefs & Head" inserted in another 
hand. 

To James S. Jackson 1 

Hon: James S. Jackson Washington, 

My dear Sir Aug. 7. 1861 

If you will, with the concurrence of the Union members of Con- 
gress, of Kentucky, raise a Regiment of Cavalry in that State, it 
shall be received into the U.S. service yourself to be Colonel, and, 
if you please, Capt. R. Johnson 2 to be Lieut. Colonel. Yours very 
truly A. LINCOUNT 

1 ALS, The Rosenbach Company, Philadelphia and New York. Representative 
James S. Jackson organized the Third Kentucky Cavalry, which was mustered 
into U.S. service on December 31, 1861. He was made brigadier general of Vol- 
unteers July 10, 1862, and was killed at the battle of Perryville, October 8, 1862. 

2 Richard W. Johnson was appointed brigadier general of Volunteers October 11, 
1861, before the Third Kentucky Cavalry was fully organized. 

To John A. McClernand 1 

Hon. John A McClernand Executive Mansion. 

My Dear Sir, Aug. /th. 1861. 

You having been appointed a Brigadier General of Illinois Vol- 
unteers 

Your Brigade will consist of four regiments if convenient and 
desirable one company of cavalry in each regiment and two artil- 
lery companies. Any four regiments -which will be agreeable to 
you and to one another, will be agreeable to me. One Regt of Hon 
John A. Logan, one of Hon P B Fouke, one of Hon J. N. Coler, and 
one of Hon B. C. Cook, will be entirely satisfactory to me 2 or if 
any one of these Regiments fail, take any other that is agreeable to 
you and to the regiment. In all this, I think it will conduce to har- 
mony for you to confer with Major General Fremont. 

A. 



1 Copy, DLC-RTjL. The copy was enclosed by McClernand to Lincoln, January 
3, 1862. 

2 Philip B. Fouke was, colonel of the Thirtieth Illinois; John A. Logan, colonel 
of the Thirty-first Illinois; William N. Coler, colonel of the Twenty-fifth Illi- 
nois; Burton C, Cook, not appointed. 

[477] 



Memorandum: Appointment of John Matthews 1 

Let Dr. John Matthews be a Regimental Surgeon for Kentucky vol- 
unteers. A. LINCOLN 
Aug. 7. 1861. 

* AES, owned by Dale Carnegie, Forest Hills, New York. Lincoln's endorse- 
ment has been clipped from the papers on which it was written. Dr. John Mat- 
thews was regimental surgeon in the Fifth Kentucky Infantry. 

To Winfield Scott 1 

Lieut. Gen'l. Scott. Executive Mansion, August 7, 1861. 

My dear Sir: If it be true, as is intimated to me that you think 
Gen'l Wool should go to Fortress Monroe, let him be ordered there 
at once. Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN. 

1 Tracy, p. 192. Major General John E. Wool took command at Fort Monroe, 
August 17, 1861, relieving Benjamin F. Butler. Edwin D. Morgan had written to 
Lincoln, August 5, 1861, ". . . Against the distinguished and loyal General 
Officer in command at Fortress Monroe I should be the last to make complaint. 
. . . But . . . the duty of disciplining undrilled troops could be most safely com- 
mitted to an experienced army officer. ... I beg to propose . . Major General 
Wool. . . ." (DLC-RTL). 

To William H. Seward 1 

Hon. Sec. of State Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir August 7. 1861 

I have all the while intended for you to appoint the Consul to 
Paris. Senator Simmons thinks you now wish to appoint William 
B. Richmond, of Tenn; and if this is so, send me the Commission 
at once, & I will sign it. Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, NAuE. See Lincoln's memorandum concerning this appointment, 
c. April i, Lincoln to Seward concerning the appointment of 'William W Rich- 
mond, June 8, supra, and Lincoln's memorandum concerning the same, August 
25, infra. Senator James F. Simmons of Rhode Island undoubtedly recommended 
William B. Richmond for the appointment, and through confusion of the names 
was listed as a supporter of "William W. Richmond. Recommendations by Senator 
Andrew Johnson of Tennessee for both men are also involved in the confused 
cases. Lincoln was under the impression that William W. Richmond was claim- 
ing Senator Simmons* sponsorship under false pretenses. 

To Gideon Welles 1 

[August 7, 1861] 
I have just received this, and now refer it to the Secretary of 

the Navy. 

1 Naval Records, I, XVI, 618. Lincoln's endorsement is on a telegram 
received from Bellamy Storer, judge of the Superior Court of Cincinnati, August 

[478] 



AUGUST g, l86l 

7, 1861, stating that "Private information to me from Savannah assures me that 
[ Josiah] Tattnall is about to move against the blockading fleet. He has six armed 
tugs. Have we a squadron large enough to oppose him?" Secretary Welles for- 
warded the information to Flag Officer William Mervine in command of the 
squadron at Key West, Florida. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion Aug. 8. 1861 

My dear Sir Edward Ellsworth, first couisin to Col. Ellsworth 
who fell at Alexandria, is a non-commissioned officer in the 4th. 
Regiment of Michigan volunteers, now stationed at the Relay 
House, wishes to be a 2nd. Lieut, in the Army. He is present while 
I write this; and he is an intelligent, and an exceedingly wary ap- 
pearing young man of 20 years' age. I shall be glad if a place can 
be found for him Yours truly A. 



1 AL.S, ORB. Edward A. Ellsworth was appointed second lieutenant in the 
Eleventh Infantry to date from October 24, 861, and promoted to first lieutenant 
as of the same date, according to the War Department's list of promotions dated 
March 15, 1862, and confirmed by the Senate on April 14, 1862. 

To Gustave E Koerner 1 

Hon. G. Koerner Washington, D.C. Aug. 8. 1861 

My dear Sir Your despatch, saying application of German Bri- 
gade is withdrawn is just received. "Without occupying our stand- 
point, you can not conceive how this subject embarrasses us. We 
have promises out to more than four hundred Regiments, which, if 
they all come, are more than we want. If they all come, we could 
not take yours, if they do not all come we shall want yours; and 
yet we have no possible means of knowing whether they will all 
come or not. I hope you will make due allowance for the embar- 
rassment this produces. Yours truly A. LmsrcoLiN" 

1 AL.S, MoSHi. Gustave E Koerner had to abandon his plan for raising a regi- 
ment of Germans because the competition for re-enlisting the three-months troops 
into three-years-or-the-war regiments, already approved, left fewer men avail- 
able than he had anticipated (Memoirs of Gustave Koerner 9 edited by Thomas 
J McCormack, II, 164). 

To Lorenzo Thomas 1 

Adjutant Genl. Thomas. Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir August 9. 1861 

By the appointment of - Marcy, this morning, as Inspector 
General, a vacancy of Pay-master, as you said, was made. Oblige 

[479] 



AUGUST 1O, l86l 

Mr. Senator King, by giving that place to Simeon Smith of Min- 
nesota. Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, IHi. Randolph B. Marcy was appointed inspector general August 9, 
and commissioned brigadier general of Volunteers September 23, 1861. Simeon 
Smith received the appointment in lieu of a place in the Treasury. See Lincoln 
to Chase, July 18, supra. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Let Alexander Bielaski be appointed an Aid de camp, with the rank 
of Captain, to Brigadier General McClernand. A. LINCOLN 
August 10. 1861. 

1 AES, Polish Roman Catholic Union, Chicago, Illinois. Lincoln's endorsement 
follows a recommendation by Winfield Scott written on the hack of John A. Mc- 
Clernand to Scott, August 10, 1861, asking that Alexander Bielaski he appointed 
". . . my aid de camp." Bielaski was appointed with rank of captain August 10, 
and was killed at the battle of Belmont, Missouri, November 7, 1861. McClernand 
to Lincoln September 11, however, refers to Bielaski's commission having been 
revoked (see Lincoln to Lorenzo Thomas, September 17, infra). 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War. Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir August 10. 1861 

If Ohio is not already overstocked with Paymasterships of Volun- 
teers, let Richard E L. Baber have one. I personally wish this done. 
Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, DLC-Cameron Papers. Richard E L. Baber, active Republican of Colum- 
bus, Ohio, was appointed additional paymaster, September 12, 1861, having de- 
clined appointment as consul at Matanzas, Cuba (Seward to Lincoln, July 25, 
1861, DLC-RTL). 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir August 10. 1861 

It is said Capt. McKnabb, or, McNabb, in Utah, has been dis- 
missed from the Army on the charge of being a disunionist; and 
that he wishes a hearing to enable him to show that the charge is 
false. Fair play is a Jewell. Give him a chance if you can. Yours 
truly A. 



1 ALS, DLC-Cameron Papers. Captain John McNab of the Tenth Infantry, in 
command at Fort Laramie, had been dismissed July i, 1861, on grounds of dis- 
loyalty. There is no record of his reinstatement. 

[480] 



To George B. McClellan 1 

Can Gen. McClellan suggest what is to be done in the within 

case ? A. LINCOLN 

Augt. 10, 1861 

i AES, ORB. Lincoln's endorsement is written on William S. Rosecrans' tele- 
gram dated at Clarksburg, August 10, detailing the need for officers and drill 
masters with "military education/' to lead and train the raw troops in Western 
Virginia. 



Pass for Messrs. Blakey and Veluzat 1 

Messrs. Blakey & Valuzat, should have passes to visit our camps 
over the River, if they apply for them. A. LINCOLN 

Aug. 10, 1861 

1 ADS, NHL The men to whom Lincoln gave the card containing his recom- 
mendation for a pass were probably George D. Blakey of Bowling Green, Ken- 
tucky, and Joel S Veluzat, a first lieutenant in the Thirteenth Kentucky Infantry. 



To William H. Seward 1 

I do not object to Senator McDougal being obliged by the ap- 
pointment of the -within named. A, LINGOES' 
Aug. 10, 1861 

1 AES, DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 272. Lincoln's endorsement is writ- 
ten on the back of James A. McDougall to Lincoln, August 6, 1861, recommend- 
ing Israel S. Diehl of California for consul **. . . at Smyrna or to some post in 
the East. . . . Mr. Diehl has long and prominently been identified with those 
reformatory movements which have done so much to benefit the people of the 
Pacific coast. . . ." Diehl was appointed consul at Batavia, Java, August 12, 
1861. 



To William H. Seward 1 

No. 8 

Augustus Haight, of Judge Sloan's District for a Consulship. Let 
it be fairly considered. A L. 

August 10. 1861. 

1 AES, DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 299. Lincoln's endorsement is writ- 
ten on an envelope addressed by Lincoln to "Hon Sec. of State." Wisconsin Rep- 
resentative Andrew S. Sloan's candidate for a consulship is not listed as 
appointed to office. 

[481] 



Proclamation of a National Fast Day 1 

August 12, 1861 
By the President of the United States of America: 

A Proclamation. 

Whereas a joint Committee of both Houses of Congress has 
waited on the President of the United States, and requested him to 
"recommend a day of public humiliation, prayer and fasting, to be 
observed by the people of the United States with religious solemni- 
ties, and the offering of fervent supplications to Almighty God for 
the safety and welfare of these States, His blessings on their arms, 
and a speedy restoration of peace:" 

And whereas it is fit and becoming in all people, at all times, to 
acknowledge and revere the Supreme Government of God; to bow- 
in humble submission to his chastisements; to confess and deplore 
their sins and transgressions in the full conviction that the fear of 
the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; and to pray, with all fervency 
and contrition, for the pardon of their past offences, and for a bless- 
ing upon their present and prospective action: 

And whereas, when our own beloved Country, once, by the bless- 
ing of God, united, prosperous and happy, is now afflicted with 
faction and civil war, it is peculiarly fit for us to recognize the 
hand of God in this terrible visitation, and in sorrowful remem- 
brance of our own faults and crimes as a nation and as individuals, 
to humble ourselves before Him, and to pray for His mercy, to 
pray that we may be spared further punishment, though most just- 
ly deserved; that our arms may be blessed and made effectual for 
the re-establishment of law, order and peace, throughout the wide 
extent of our country; and that the inestimable boon of civil and 
religious liberty, earned under His guidance and blessing, by the 
labors and sufferings of our fathers, may be restored in all its orig- 
inal excellence: 

Therefore, I, Abraham Lincoln, President of the United States, 
do appoint the last Thursday in September next, as a day of humil- 
iation, prayer and fasting for all the people of the nation. And I do 
earnestly recommend to all the People, and especially to all min- 
isters and teachers of religion of all denominations, and to all heads 
of families, to observe and keep that day according to their several 
creeds and modes of worship, in all humility and with all religious 
solemnity, to the end that the united prayer of the nation may as- 
cend to the Throne of Grace and bring down plentiful blessings 
upon our Country. 

[482] 



AUGUST 3, l86l 

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, and caused 

the Seal of the United States to be affixed, this i2tfa. 

[L.S.] day of August A.D. 1861, and of the Independence of 

the United States of America the 86th. 

By the President: ABRAECAM LINCOLN. 

"WiLLiAivr H. SEWARD, Secretary of State. 

* DS, DNA FS RG 11, Proclamations. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir August 13. 1861 

Let noiv Brigadier Genl. David Hunter be a Major General of 
Volunteers to be assigned to a Division of Illinois Volunteers. Also 
let George H. Stoneman, and William F. Smith, both now in the 
service, each be a Brigadier General of Volunteers. Also Henry W. 
Benham, a Brigadier General of Volunteers. I mean Capt. Benham, 
so often spoken of, and am not sure I have his Christian name cor- 
rect; but you will know. 2 Yours truly A. 



1 ALS-P, ISLA. The four appointments were made August 13, according to 
Lincoln's instructions. 

2 Henry W. Benham had been appointed major in the corps of engineers on 
August 6. 

To William H. Seward 1 

Hon. Mr. Babbit presents this, & I ask respectful attention to 
it. A. LINCOLN 

Aug. 13. 1861 

1 AES, DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 263. Lincoln's endorsement is 
written on the back of a letter written by Representative Elijah Babbitt of 
Pennsylvania, August 13, 1861, recommending Allen A. Craig for a consulship, 
preferably at Glasgow. Craig is not listed as appointed to any consulship. 

To William H. Seward 1 

Why may not this young man have Venice, which is only $750 or 

Nice, which has Fees only? Senator Pomeroy is very anxious for it. 

Aug. 13. 1861. A. LINCOLN 

1AES, DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 242. Lincoln's endorsement is 
written on the back of the application and list of recommendations of Antonio 
Buchignani for the consulship at Venice or Nice, August 1861. No appointment 
for Buchignani is listed in the U.S. Official Register, 1861, but in 1863 he is listed 
as messenger in the House of Representatives. 

[483] 



To Winfield Scott 1 

August 14, 1861 

I have only a slight acquaintance with Mr. Villard, as a gentle- 
manly newspaper correspondent; and as such I commend him to 
others. A 



Aug. 14. 1861. 

1 AES, DLC-RTL. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of Henry Vil- 
lard's letter, undated, offering his services ". . .in supplying General Scott with 
whatever information of usefulness to him I shall be able to collect during my 
stay in Memphis, Richmond, New Orleans & other points I propose to visit. . . ." 
There is no indication in Villard's Memoirs that anything came of this offer, but 
his tour was fully reported in the New York Herald and is extensively recounted 
in Villard's Memoirs (I, 200 ff.). 

To Lorenzo Thomas 1 

August 14, 1861 

It is said Capt. Dallas was rejected by the Senate through mistake. 
If Gen. Thomas can be satisfied, to a reasonable degree of certainty, 
that this is true, let Capt. Dallas be reappointed at once. 

Aug. 14. 1861 A. LiisrcoLN 

1 AES, owned by B.. E. Burdick, New York City. Lincoln's endorsement is writ- 
ten on a letter from Brigadier General William B. Franklin, August 12, request- 
ing that the case of Alexander J, Dallas, whose appointment as captain in the 
Twelfth Infantry had been rejected by the Senate on August 5, be reconsidered 
on the basis of information furnished by Franklin. Below Lincoln's endorsement 
is the following: 

"It was stated in the Military Comtee. of Senate, that Capt. Dallas was dis- 
missed from the Navy & Marine Corps. This caused his rejection. Had the truth 
been known, he would have been confirmed by the Senate & endorsed by the 
Comtee. without doubt. In my opinion a great wrong has been done this gentle- 
man. "MILTON S. LATHAM 

"Aug 15.761 of S. Mil. Comtee. 

"I concur in the above 
H WILSON" 

Dallas had served (1846-1851) as midshipman in the Navy. See Lincoln's fur- 
ther communication to Thomas in this case, August 17, infra. 

To John C. Fremont 1 

Washington, August 15, 1861. 

Been answering your messages ever since day before yesterday. 
Do you receive the answers? The War Department has notified all 
the governors you designate to f orward all available force. So tele- 
graphed you. Have you received these messages? Answer imme- 
diately. A. 

Major General Fremont. 

[484] 



AUGUST 15, l86l 

l Thirty-seventh Congress, Third Session, Senate Reports, No. 8, III, 115. Sen- 
ate Report No. 8 dates this telegram August 5, 1861, but this is obviously a mis- 
print, as Lincoln's telegram, is printed in sequence following communications of 
August 14, and Fremont replied on August 15, "Dispatch rec'd. Answer reed from 
Messrs. Blair & Scott yesterday & today from secty of war." (DLC-RTL) . Follow- 
ing the Confederate advances of early August in Southwest Missouri and up the 
Mississippi River, Fremont was frantically requesting reinforcements for his 
command. 

To John A. Gurley 1 

Washington, D.C., August 15, 1861. 

John A. Gurley, Cincinnati, Ohio: The Grosbeck regiment is or- 
dered to join Fremont at once. Has it gone? Answer immediately. 

A. LIN-COUN-. 

1 NH, VI, 344. Gurley's telegram to Lincoln from Cincinnati, August 14, 
asked authority to send "the Groesbeck Regt." to Fremont. In reply to the above 
telegram, Gurley informed Lincoln, August 15, that the regiment had not gone 
but "Will go soon." (DLC-RTL). The regiment commanded by Colonel John 
Groesbeck became the Thirty-ninth Ohio Infantry. 

To Oliver E Morton 1 

War Department, 

Washington City August 15, 1861 9:20 a.m. 
Governor Morton, Indiana: Start your four regiments to Saint 
Louis at the earliest moment possible. Get such harness as may be 
necessary for your rifled guns. Do not delay a single regiment, but 
hasten everything forward as soon as any one regiment is ready. 
Have your three additional regiments organized at once. "We shall 
endeavor to send you the arms this week. A. 



1 OR, III, I, 413. Morton to Cameron, August 14: "Will start four regiments to 
Saint Louis day after to-morrow. I have . . . three battalions of rifled cannon 
. . . but have no harness. . . . "Will have three additional regiments ready in 
six days, but they have no arms. . . ." (Ibid., p. 410). 

To James Pollock 1 

Hon. James Pollock Washington, August 15, 1861 

My dear Sir You must make a job of it, and provide a place for 
the bearer of this, Elias Wampole. Make a job of it with the Col- 
lector, and have it done. You can do it for me, and you must. Yours 
as ever A 



i AL.S, PHC. James Pollock, former governor of Pennsylvania (1855-1858), 
was director of the mint at Philadelphia. The U.S. Official Register does not list 
Elias Wampole in 1861, but in 1863, he appears as consul at Laguayra, Venezuela, 

[485] 



AUGUST 16, l86l 

appointed from Pennsylvania. William B, Thomas, collector of customs at Phila- 
delphia, wrote to Lincoln August 22, that Pollock had called with Lincoln's letter 
recommending Wampole, but that since Wampole was really a citizen of Illi- 
nois he should get an office there (DLC-Nicolay Papers). Wampole had formerly 
resided in Menard County, Illinois, where he doubtless made Lincoln's acquaint- 
ance. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir Aug. 16. 1861 

If there is a letter in your Dept. written by Col. Cass of Mass. 
gth. in relation to trial of Michael H. Macnamara, by a Court 
Marshal [_sic~] , please send it to me by the bearer. 

A. 



1 ALS, DLC-Cameron Papers. There is no reply from Cameron in the Lincoln 
Papers. Colonel Thomas Cass was in command of the Ninth Massachusetts In- 
fantry, from, -which First Lieutenant Michael H. McNamara, of Company E, 
was dismissed on September 10, 1861. McNamara enlisted again as a private 
August 14, 1862, and was mustered out as sergeant June 21, 1864. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

I believe the writer of this is our Gen. Thomas, M.Q of Maryland; 
and if so, let the man he recommends be appointed. 
Aug. 16. 1861 A. 



1 AES, IHi. Lincoln's endorsement appears on a letter from Representa- 
tive Francis Thomas, Washington, August 16, 1861, requesting appointment as 
lieutenant of George M. Downey, "who on account of his earnest devoted sup- 
port of your administration has been forced to leave his home at Piedmont 
Virginia. . . ." Downey was appointed first lieutenant in the Fourteenth TJ.S 
Infantry on October 26, 1861. 



Memorandum : 

Appointment of Clarence Darling 1 

Executive Mansion Aug. 16. 1861 

To-day William A. Darling, of New- York, and a Presidential Elec- 
tor last year, calls and asks that his son, Clarence Darling, not 16 
till Oct. 1862 be a Cadet at West. Point. I file this for a memor- 
andum till the time comes. A. LiisrcoLisr 

1 ADS, DLC-RTL. There is no record of the appointment of Clarence Darling. 

[486] 



Proclamation Forbidding Intercourse 
with Rebel States 1 

August 16, 1861 
By the President of the United States of America. 

A Proclamation 

Whereas, on the igth. day of April, 1861, the President of the 
United States, in view of an insurrection against the Laws Consti- 
tution and Government of the United States which had broken out 
within the States of South Carolina Georgia, Alabama, Florida, 
Mississippi, Louisiana & Texas, and in pursuance of the provisions 
of the Act entitled "An Act to provide for calling forth the militia 
to execute the laws of the Union, suppress insurrections, and repel 
invasions, and to repeal the act now in force for that purpose," ap- 
proved Feb. 28th., 1795, did call forth the militia to suppress said 
insurrection and to cause the Laws of the Union to be duly exe- 
cuted, and the insurgents have failed to disperse by the time di- 
rected by the President, and whereas such insurrection has since 
broken out and yet exists within the States of Virginia, North Caro- 
lina, Tennessee and Arkansas; and whereas the insurgents in all 
the said States claim to act under the authority thereof, and such 
claim is not disclaimed or repudiated by the persons exercising the 
functions of government in such State or States, or in the part or 
parts thereof in which such combinations exist, nor has such insur- 
rection been suppressed by said States; Now, therefore, I, Abraham 
Lincoln, President of the United States, in pursuance of an Act of 
Congress approved July 13, 1861, do hereby declare that the in- 
habitants of the said States of Georgia, South Carolina, Virginia, 
North Carolina, Tennessee, Alabama, Louisiana, Texas, Arkansas, 
Mississippi & Florida (except the inhabitants of that part of the 
State of Virginia lying "west of the Allegheny Mountains and of 
such other parts of that State & the other States hereinbefore 
named as may maintain a loyal adhesion to the Union and the 
Constitution, or may be from time to time occupied and controlled 
by forces of the United States engaged in the dispersion of said in- 
surgents,) are in a state of insurrection against the United States, 
and that all commercial intercourse between the same and the in- 
habitants thereof, -with the exceptions aforesaid, and the citizens of 
other States and other parts of the United States is unlawful, and 
will remain unlawful until such insurrection shall cease or has 
been suppressed; that all goods and chattels, wares and merchan- 
dize, coming from any of said States, with the exceptions aforesaid, 

[487] 



AUGUST I/, l86l 

into other parts of the United States, -without the special license 
and permission of the President through the Secretary of the 
Treasury, or proceeding to any of said States, with the exceptions 
aforesaid, by land or -water, together with the vessel or vehicle 
conveying the same, or conveying persons to or from said States 
with said exceptions, will be forfeited to the United States; and that 
from and after Fifteen Days from the issuing of this Proclamation, 
all ships and vessels belonging in whole or in part to any citizen 
or inhabitant of any of said States with said exceptions found at 
sea or in any port of the United States, will be forfeited to the 
United States; and I hereby enjoin upon all District Attorneys, 
Marshals and Officers of the Revenue and of the Military and Na- 
val Forces of the United States to be vigilant in the execution of said 
Act, and in the enforcement of the penalties and forfeitures im- 
posed or declared by it; leaving any party who may think himself 
aggrieved thereby to his application to the Secretary of the Treas- 
ury for the remission of any penalty or forfeiture, which the said 
Secretary is authorized by law to grant if, in his judgment, the 
special circumstances of any case shall require such remission. 

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caiised 
the Seal of the United States to be affixed. 

Done at the City of "Washington, this i6th day of 
[JL.S.] August, in the year of our Lord 1861, and of the Inde- 

pendence of the United States the Eighty-sixth. 

By the President: ABRAHAM LINCOLN. 

WILLIAM: H. SEWARD, Secretary of State. 

1 D, DNA FS RG 11, Proclamations. Both the signatures of Lincoln and Seward 
are in the handwriting of Seward. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir August 17, 1861 

These gentlemen Samuel Gamage, and Charles R. Saunders 
are Californians, who were well recommended for offices which 
have been given to others. I am now willing that they should be 
appointed Pay-Masters of Volunteers, as Calif or nians. Yours truly 

A. 



1 ALS, DLC-Cameron Papers. Samuel Gamage was appointed captain and 
commissary of subsistence of Volunteers September 7, 1861. Charles R. Saunders 
was appointed additional paymaster of Volunteers September 5, 1861, but was 
rejected by the Senate March 6, 1862. See Lincoln's memoranda to Cameron on 
these appointments, August 29, and September 4, infra. 

[488] 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Secretary of War: Executive Mansion, August 17, 1861. 

My dear Sir. Unless there be reason to the contrary, not known 
to me, make out a commission for Simon [B.] Buckner, of Ken- 
tucky, as a brigadier-general of volunteers. It is to be put into the 
hands of General Anderson, and delivered to General Buckner or 
not, at the discretion of General Anderson. Of course it is to remain 
a secret unless and until the commission is delivered. Yours, truly, 

A. LINCOLN. 
{Indorsement. ] 

Same day made. 

1 OR, I, IV, 255. Simon B. Buckner declined the appointment and accepted a 
com mission as brigadier general in the Confederate Army. Brackets are in the 
source. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir August 17 1861 

Let Henry Wager Halleck, of California, be appointed a Major 
General in the Regular Army. I make this appointment on Gen. 
Scott's recommendation; and I am sure he said to me verbally that 
the appointment is to be in the Regular Army, though a memo- 
randum on the subject handed me by one of his aids, says "of vol- 
unteers" Perhaps the Adjt. [Genl. should communicate with] 
Genl. Scott, on the qxiestion. 2 Yours truly A. LmcoLisr 

1 ALS, DLC-Cameron Papers, Henry W. Halleck was appointed major general 
in the Regular Army, August 19, 1861. 

2 Lincoln obviously failed to complete his thought between "Adjt." at the end 
of one line and "Genl. Scott" at the beginning of the next. The bracketed insertion 
has been supplied by the editors. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

August 17, 1861 

If it be according to the law, & the rules, let Thomas M. Key be ap- 
pointed, as requested within by Gen. McClellan. For a reason, in 
no wise disrespectful to Gen. McClellan, nor derogatory to Col. 
Sackett, I can not, as yet, appoint him. A. Lmcousr. 

Aug. 17. 1861. 

1 AES, NN. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of George B. Mc- 
Clellan's letter of August 16, 1861, requesting Thomas M. Key be appointed his 
aide-de-camp with rank of colonel, and that Lieutenant Delos B. Sacket be ap- 
pointed inspector general with rank of colonel. Key was appointed August 19, and 
Sacket October i, 1861. 

[489] 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Let George A. Flagg named within be appointed an Assistant 
Quar-Master, of Volunteers. A. LirccoiJN- 

Aug. 17, 1861. 

1 AES, IHi. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of a duplicate copy 
of a letter of John L. King to Caleb B. Smith, Chicago, March 24, 1861, asking 
that George A. Flagg of Chicago be appointed to some territorial land office. 
Flagg was appointed captain and assistant quartermaster of Volunteers on Sep- 
tember 10, 1861. 



To Isabel II 1 

August 17, 1861 
Abraham Lincoln, 

President of the United States of America. 
To Her Majesty Isabel II, 

By the Grace of God and the Constitution 
of the Spanish Monarchy, Queen of Spain, 

&c., &c. 

Great and Good Friend: I have received the letter which 
Your Majesty was pleased to address to me on the 22nd. day of 
June, last, announcing the birth of an Infanta, upon whom had 
been bestowed in sacred baptism the names of Maria del Pilar Ber- 
enguela Isabel Francisca de Asis Christina Sebastiana Gabriela 
Francisca Caracciola Saturnina. 

I participate in the satisfaction afforded by this happy event, and 
offer to Your Majesty my sincere congratulations upon the occa- 
sion. 

May God have Your Majesty always in His safe and holy keep- 
ing! Your Good Friend, ABRAHAM: LUNTCOLTST. 
Washington, August 17, 1861. 
By the President: 

WILLIAM: H. SEWARD, Secretary of State. 

1 Copy, DNA FS RG 59, Communications to Foreign Sovereigns and States, 
III, 178-79- 



To WiUiam H. Seward 1 

August 17, 1861 

Mr. J. Wagner Jermon, was an applicant for Consul to Glasgow, 
& now wishes Melbourne. If the latter is open, the Sec. of State can 

[490] 



AUGUST 1Q, 86l 

fill it according to his pleasure, giving fair consideration to Mr. 
Jermon's claim. A LINCOLN 

Aug. 17. 1861 

* AES, DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 317. J. Wagner Jermon of Philadel- 
phia received neither appointment. 

_^ To William H. Seward 1 

August 17, 1861 

I, herein, send the Sec. of State, a new application for the Con- 
sulate at Melbo[u]rne. The applicant is a New- Yorker; and as the 
Secretary will see, is very well recommended. A. LINCOLN 
Aug. 17. 1861. 

1 AES, DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 407. Charles C. Yeaton, the appli- 
cant, did not receive the appointment. 

To Lorenzo Thomas 1 

August 17, 1861 

I repeat that if Adjutant Genl. Thomas is reasonably well satisfied 
that Capt. Dallas was rejected by the Senate through misappre- 
[hen] sion of facts, he is to be re-appointed. It is the opinion of the 
Adjutant General, and of Genl. Franklin, as shown by what they 
have written written [szc] "within, that he is a good officer. Aug. 
17. 1861. A. LINCOLN 

1 AES, owned by R. E. Burdick, N"ew York City. See Lincoln's earlier endorse- 
ment in this case, August 14, supra. Alexander J. Dallas* reappointment was con- 
firmed by the Senate February 20, 1862. 

To George B. McClellan 1 

[c. August 18, 1861] 
Gen. McClellan please read and return these. A L 

1 AES, DL.C-RTL. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from John S. 
Carlile to Salmon P. Chase, August 18, 1861, describing conditions in Western 
Virginia. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir August 19, 1861 

At the request of Brigadier General Anderson, I have concluded 
to appoint George H. Thomas, of the and. Cavalry, a Brigadier 
General of Volunteers. 2 

[491] 



AUGUST 1Q, l86l 

Also, let the Hon. James Shields, now of California, be appointed 
a Brigadier General of Volunteers. 3 

Also, Col. Michael Corcoran, now a prisoner at Richmond. 4 
Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, owned by Frederick M. Dearborn, New York City. 

2 George H. Thomas, under appointment dated August 1 7, was assigned to 
duty in Kentucky organizing troops. 

3 James Shields was appointed August 19. 

4 Colonel Michael Corcoran of the Sixty-ninth New York Regiment had been 
captured at the Battle of Bull Run, and remained a prisoner until August 15, 1862. 
His appointment as brigadier general dated back to July 21, 1861, was not sent to 
the Senate until December 23, 1862, but along with numerous others on the list 
of that date was returned to the president because of an error of reference to the 
act under which the appointments were made. Confirmation of the appointment 
by the Senate was finally made March 11, 1863. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

August 19, 1861 

In view of the abundant evidence of the efficiency and valuable serv- 
ice of Capt. Leib, as an Assistant Quarter Master, and especially 
that borne by Generals Rosecrans, Kelly & Oakes, within^ I think 
he should be re-appointed to his place, unless it is known that some 
change of magnitude, was made, and proved against him before the 
Senate. A. LUNTCOUST 

Aug. 19. 1861. 

1 AES, IHi. Charles Leib of Illinois had been appointed first lieutenant in the 
Eleventh Infantry of the Regular Army, May 14, 1861, but was rejected by the 
Senate August 5. In spite of recommendations from his superiors (Brigadier Gen- 
eral William S. Rosecrans, Brigadier General Benjamin F. KLelley, and Major 
James Oakes) upon which he was reappointed, he was again rejected by the Sen- 
ate both as first lieutenant and as captain and assistant quartermaster, to which 
rank he had been advanced as of May 21, 1861. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War: Executive Mansion Aug. 19. 1861. 

I understand Mr. Edwards left here a Commissary of subsist- 
ence; but not assigned to any particular Brigade* If this be so, let 
Josiah M. Lucas, formerly of Illinois, now of D.C. be Commissary 
of Subsistence, and assigned to Genl. McClernand's Brigade. 3 Yours 
truly A. LINCOLN 

* ALS, IHi. 

2 Ninian W. Edwards was appointed captain and commissary of subsistence of 
Volunteers, August 8, 1861. 

8 Cameron endorsed this appointment on the bottom of this letter, August a 2, 
and the appointment was made as of that date. 

[492] 



To Simon Cameron 1 

I think the personal favor within asked by Mr. Stratton ought to 
be granted, if possible. A. LINCOLN 

Aug. 19. 1861. 

i AES, DNA WR RG 107, Secretary of War, Personnel Appointments, Box 12. 
Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of Representative John L. N. Strat- 
ton's letter of May 4, 1861, recommending Samuel H. Howell of New Jersey for 
a clerkship. Howell is listed in the US. Official Register, 1863, as paymaster's 
clerk in the War Department. 

To William H. Seward 1 

August 19, 1861 

I think the case of Major Jewell is one of merit; and that we ought 
to find something for him, even if we can not find a consulship. 
Will the Sec. of State please consider this? A. LirccoxjNr 

Aug. 19. 1861. 

1 AES, DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 318. Lincoln's endorsement is writ- 
ten on the back of a letter from J. Grey Jewell of Mississippi, "(late) Major 
comd'g 2nd. Batn. D.C. Volunteers," asking for a consulship. The U.S. Official 
Record, 1863, lists him as a clerk in the sixth auditor's office. 

To Lorenzo Thomas 1 

If appointments of Pay-Masters are not already too numerous, let 
Mr. Senator Harlan be obliged by the appointment within re- 
quested. A. LINCOLN 
Aug. 19. 1861. 

1 AES, RPB. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from Senator James 
Harlan, July 4, 1861, recommending appointment of Alvin Walker of New York 
as paymaster. Walker was appointed September 10, 1861. 

To Lorenzo Thomas 1 

August 19, 1861 

Mr. Nicholas Vedder, is within recommended for a Volunteer Pay- 
mastership by our Illinois Democratic members of Congress, now 
heartily aiding us in the war, and is a good man withal, which I 
tibiink are sufficient reasons for me to direct that he be appointed. 
Aug. 19, 1861. A. LmcoLisr 

1 AES, owned by R. E. Burdick, New York City. Lincoln's endorsement is writ- 
ten on the back of an undated letter from Illinois members of congress, recom- 
mending the appointment of Nicholas Vedder of Greene County, Illinois. 
Vedder, who had been appointed secretary of the Senate committee on Terri- 
tories under the chairmanship of Stephen A. Douglas in 1856, was appointed 
additional paymaster of Volunteers, September 5, 1861. 

[493] 



To Gideon Welles 1 

Respectfully submitted to the Navy Department, with request 
for a respectful consideration. A. LINCOLN. 

Aug. 19, 1861. 

* American Art Association Catalog, May 6, 19157 No. 316. According to the 
catalog description, Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of a letter from 
Edward C. Carrington, recommending Captain S. E. Arnold for a commission in 
the Marine Corps. There is no record of the appointment. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

Sir. Aug. 20. 1861 

Gen. McClellan requests that John F. Reynolds, and William 
F. Barry be appointed Brigadier Generals of volunteers; and so let 
it be done. Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

1 Copy, ISLA. The letter bears Cameron's endorsement "Let it be done." Both 
appointments were made on this date. John F. Reynolds, West Point 1841, was 
lieutenant colonel of the Fourteenth Infantry. William F. Barry, West Point 1838, 
was major in the Fifth Artillery. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Unless there be some reason, not known to me, let the appoint- 
ments, as above suggested by Gen. Thomas, be made. 

August 20. 1861. A. LINCOLN 

1 AES, DLC-Cameron Papers. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from 
Representative Francis Thomas of Maryland, August 20, 1861, recommending 
the appointment of William E Maulsby, colonel; Lewis P. Fiery, major; and 
Charles E. Rail, lieutenant colonel, of the First Maryland Regiment, Potomac 
Home Brigade. No record has been found of federal appointment in these cases. 

To William EL Seward 1 

Hon. Sec. of State Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir. August 20. 1861 

Mr. Zebina Eastman, of Chicago, Ills, is one of the earliest, and 
most efficient of our free-soil laborers. If a position, with even mod- 
erate pay, could be found for him in England, he is just the man 
to reach the sympathies of the English people, to the extent that he 
can come in contact with them. He is more than a common man, 
in his sphere; and I shall be very glad if you can find out, or fix 
out for him, some such place as I have indicated. Yours truly 

A. 



1 ALS, NAuE. Zebina Eastman, Chicago newspaper editor and abolitionist, 
is listed in the U.S. Official Register, 1861, as consul at Bristol. 

[494] 



To Francis P. Blair, Jr. 1 

August 21, 1861 

I repeat, I will commission the officers of Missouri Volunteers. 
Colonel Blair. A. LINCOLN. 

1 Thirty-seventh Congress, Third Session, Senate Reports,, No. 108, III, 115. 
Colonel Francis P Blair, Jr., telegraphed Montgomery Blair, August 21, 1861, "It 
is necessary for the president to commission our officers as ... the law of this 
state . . . make[s] it impossible to act under it ... at present no officer in the 
Missouri service has a commission. . . ." (DLC-BTL) . 



To Simon Cameron 1 

I shall be gratified if Mr. Hertford can retain the place he now 
holds in the War Department. A. LINCOIJNF 

Aug. 21, 1861 

1 AES, DLC-Cameron Papers Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back 
of a letter from Joseph Hertford, August 19, 1861. A temporary clerk in the War 
Department, friend of Leonard Swett and Ward H. Lamon and an ex-Chicagoan, 
Hertford apparently did not keep his War Department position, but in 1862 se- 
cured a place in the Bureau of Internal Revenue. 



To Edward Bates 1 

AngUSt 22, l86l 

Will the Attorney General please make out pardons in the Mis- 
souri cases he and I spoke of, and place them in my hands? 

1 American Art Association Anderson Galleries Catalog 3781, October 30, 1929, 
No. 90. Bates to Lincoln, August 24, 1861, "It was my fault not to enquire at 
what time you wd need the Mo. pardon, & the draft of your letter to Gov. Gamble. 
I leave them now 12 15 p m. having changed your draft in no respect, except 
in the addition of a short sentence, which, it seemed to me, might tend to con- 
ciliate good feeling in Mo." (DLC-RTL) . Lincoln's letter to Governor Hamilton 
R. Gamble is presumably not extant and the pardons have not been located. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Secretary of War. Executive Mansion, August 22, 1861. 

Sir: Victor B. Bell, now of Colorado, is one of my most valued 
friends; and one of the best, if not the very best clerk I ever knew. 
I would like for him to be an Asst. Quarter Master or Commissary 
of Subsistence of Volunteers. 

Can you not fix it for me? Yours truly, A. 

August 22, 1861. 

[495] 



AUGUST 22, l86l 

i Tracy, p. 193. Victor B. Bell, who had served as representative from Wabash 
County in the Illinois House of Representatives (1853-1854), is not of record for 
either appointment. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Let the Appointment within requested, be made. A. LINCOLN. 
Aug. 22, 1861. 

* AES, owned by R. S. Ruwitch, Chicago, Illinois. Lincoln's endorsement is 
written on a letter from General George B. McClellan, August 22, 1861, asking 
appointment of Richard B. Irwm of the District of Columbia as captain and aide- 
de-camp. Irwin's appointment, made the same day, was confirmed by the Senate 
on February 3, 1862. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

Sir August 22. 1861 

My impression is that few Assistant Quarter-Masters, or Com- 
missaries of Subsistence, for volunteers, have, as yet, been ap- 
pointed from Ohio. If I am right in this, let Willard Slocum, of 
Ohio be appointed to one, or the other of those offices. Yours truly 

A. 



1 ALS, DLC-Cameron Papers. Willard Slocum of Ohio had resigned his place 
as captain in the Twenty-third Ohio on July 18, and was appointed first lieuten- 
ant and adjutant of the One Hundred Twentieth Ohio Infantry, August 25, 1862. 
There is no record of his appointment as per Lincoln's recommendation in this 
letter. 



Concerning Mr. Rutherford 1 

Is there anything in the "Marble line" which could be given Mr. 
Rutherford? A. L. 

Aug. 22, l86l. 
1 ADS, CSmH. Rutherford Has not been identified. 



Endorsement 1 

I think that the young man within recommended, ought to be 
appointed, if possible. There is some peculiar reason for it. 

Aug. 22, 1861. A. LINCOLN 

1 Tracy, p. 194. Efforts to locate the document and to identify the case have 
failed. 

[496] 



To Beriah Magoffin 1 

To His Excellency Washington, D.C. 

B. Magoffin August 24. 1861 

Governor of the State of Kentucky. 

Sir: Your letter of the igth. Inst. in which you "urge the re- 
moval from the limits of Kentucky of the military force now or- 
ganized, and in camp within said State" is received, 

I may not possess full and precisely accurate knowledge upon 
this subject; but I believe it is true that there is a military force in 
camp within Kentucky, acting by authority of the United States, 
which force is not very large, and is not now being augmented. 

I also believe that some arms have been furnished to this force 
by the United States. 

I also believe this force consists exclusively of KentucHans, hav- 
ing their camp in the immediate vicinity of their own homes, and 
not assailing, or menacing, any of the good people of Kentucky. 

In all I have done in the premises, I have acted upon the urgent 
solicitation of many KentucHans, and in accordance with what I 
believed, and still believe, to be the wish of a majority of all the 
Union-loving people of Kentucky. 

While I have conversed on this subject with many eminent men 
of Kentucky, including a large majority of her Members of Con- 
gress, I do not remember that any one of them, or any other person, 
except your Excellency and the bearers of your Excellency's letter, 
has urged me to remove the military force from Kentucky, or to 
disband it. One other very -worthy citizen of Kentucky did solicit 
me to have the augmenting of the force suspended for a time. 

Taking all the means within my reach to form a judgment, I do 
not believe it is the popular wish of Kentucky that this force shall 
be removed beyond her limits; and, with this impression, I must 
respectfully decline to so remove it. 

I most cordially sympathize with your Excellency, in the wish 
to preserve the peace of my own native State, Kentucky; but it is 
with regret I search, and can not find, in your not very short letter, 
any declaration, or intimation, that you entertain any desire for 
the preservation of the Federal Union. Your Obedient Servant, 

A. Liisrcorjsr 

1 ALS, IHi; ALS copy, DLC-RTL. Governor Magoffin's letter of August 19, pro- 
tested recruitment and establishment of camps in Kentucky "... without the ad- 
vice or consent of the Authorities of the State. . . ." (DLC-RTL). Although the 
state legislature remained loyal, MagofEn persisted in his declared "neutrality" 
and acted in sympathy with the Confederacy until August, 1862, when he re- 
signed. 

[497] 



To Caleb B. Smith 1 

August 24, 1861 

I do not know Mr. Jones. Mr. Shackelf ord who writes the within I 
know to be a good man. I have no objection to Mr. Jones having an 
Indian Agency, if there be one not disposed of or committed. 
Aug. 24, 1861 A. LINCOLN 

1 AES, DNA NR RG 48, Applications, Indian Agencies, Miscellaneous 1857- 
1864, Box 1268. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from James M. 
Shackelford of Richmond, Kentucky, August 14, 1861, asking appointment of Dr. 
William W. Jones of Madison County, Kentucky, to an Indian agency. No ap- 
pointment is listed in the U.S. Official Register. 

To Lorenzo Thomas 1 

Let the appointment be made, as within requested. 
Aug. 24, 1861. A. LINCOLN 

1 AES, RPB. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from George B. Me- 
Clellan, August 23, 1861, requesting appointment of Thomas T. Gantt of St. 
Louis ". . . an Aid de Camp to myself with the rank of Colonel." The appoint- 
ment was made on August 26, 1861. 

Memorandum : 

Appointment of William W. Richmond 1 

August 25, 1861 

Will Mr. Richmond distinctly declare that he did not write a letter 
to Mrs. L. giving Senator Simmons' name, as one of his backers for 
a Consulate? A.L. 

Aug. 25, 1861 

1 AES, IHi. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of William W. Rich- 
mond to Lincoln, Washington, August 25, 1861, complaining of Lincoln's refusal 
to see him "... upon the supposition that I was unworthy of that common 
courtesy: that you supposed I had unauthorisedly drawn money from the Treas- 
ury and that I had substituted myself for some one else'" Richmond explained 
that he had acted in good faith, supposing himself legitimately appointed, but that 
he was not William B. Richmond. He also denied having listed Senator Simmons 
among his supporters. Unfortunately his letter addressed to Mrs. Lincoln August 
8, 1861 (DLC-RTL), did list Senator Simmons among the references, and Lin- 
coln's dubiety, when he was confronted by the senator's denial, is readily under- 
stood. In Richmond's letter to Mrs. Lincoln, Senator Simmons' name occurs among 
several others inserted after the letter was written, as names of persons whom 
Richmond had been told were supporting his application. Richmond explained to 
Lincoln in a letter of September 21, 1861, that the copy of the unfortunate let- 
ter retained by himself did not contain any of the names listed. As a result of the 
confusion, neither William B. Richmond nor William W. Richmond received the 
consulship at Paris, and William B. Richmond was further disappointed in fail- 
ing of confirmation for the consulship at Tunis when Lincoln withdrew his nom- 
ination, March 24, 1862. See also Lincoln to Seward, August 7, supra. 

[498] 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Unless there be some reason to the contrary unknown to me, let 
Gen. Richardson be gratified in the appointment of his Staff. 
Aug. 26. 1861. A. 



1 AES, IHi. Lincoln's endorsement appears on a letter from Brigadier 
General Israel B. Richardson, Camp near Arlington, Fort Albany, August 24, 
1861, asking that his request made "five weeks since" for appointments to his 
staff be expedited as follows: John. Mason Norvell, adjutant of the Second 
Michigan Infantry, to be assistant adjutant general with rank of captain; Ed- 
ward S. Earle, adjutant of the Third Michigan Infantry, to be brigade com- 
missary with rank of captain; Christopher W. Leffingwell of Michigan, to be 
brigade quartermaster with rank of major. Norvell was appointed on August 
30, Earle on September 9, and Leffingwell on September 10, but Leffingwell 
failed to be confirmed by the Senate. 

To Salmon E Chase 1 

To the Secretary of the Treasury, August 26, 1861 

Sir, You are hereby authorised and directed to make such ad- 
vances to any agent appointed under the Act of Congress ap- 
proved 31 July 1861, as may be required by the Secretary of War, 
as necessary to the faithful and prompt discharge of the duties of 
such agent. ABRAHAM LmcoLisr 

Executive Mansion 

August 265 1861. 
1 LS, DNA FI RG 56, General Records, Treasury Department, Series AB, 1861, 



To John C. Fremont 1 

Washington, August 26, 1861. 

Intelligent gentlemen at Louisville say the presence of Rous- 
seau's regiment is needed there. Pardon us for countermanding 
your order to him to join your department. A. LiJNrcoLisr. 

General Fremont. 

1 Thirty-seventh Congress, Third Session, Senate Reports, No. 08, III, 117. 
Bland Ballard, James Speed, Joshua F. Speed, and others telegraphed Lincoln 
August 24, **. . . In our opinions passing events show that . . . [Rousseau's regi- 
ment] are required here <& they should be detained here if possible." (DLC-RTL) . 

To Montgomery C. Meigs 1 

GnL Meigs. [August 27, 1861] 

Mr. Wilmore & Mr Dewey 2 of Kentucky have six hundred 
mules, of a size larger than the Army standard, which they say 
you decline buying for the reason that the smaller ones, purchased 

499] 



AUGUST 27," l86l 

by you had been got at a price, eight dollars less than the man de- 
manded for them. In consideration of the service that larger ani- 
mals "will be used for in the coming winter campaign, we think the 
price should not prevent the purchase & therefore recommend it. 

snvcorc CAMEROIST 

A. 



1 LS, DLC-Chase Papers. The letter, or draft, is in Cameron's handwriting and 
is signed by both Cameron and Lincoln. The date is that assigned to the document 
in the Chase Papers. 2 Unidentified. 

To Winfield Scott 1 

August 27, 1861 

Will Lieutenant-General Scott see the bearer 2 and write briefly 
on the within letter of the Governor of New Jersey what can be 
done in the premises. A. LUNTCOLINT. 

1 OR, III, I, 450. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from Governor 
Charles S. Olden, August 24, 1861, "... I can raise, uniform, arm, and equip 
the regiments from this state. . . . but I cannot find men . . . competent to 
lead the regiments. ... I feel that the General Government owes it to this State 
to furnish at least colonels. . . ." (Jbid^ 451-52). Assistant Adjutant General Ed- 
ward D. Townsend endorsed, August 28, "The General-in-chief assents to the 
detail of Captain [Samuel H.] Starr . . . and Lieut. J [oseph] L. K. Smith . . . 
to command regiments of volunteers from New Jersey. . . ." (Ibid.). 

2 Barker Gummere. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

August 28, 1861 

The writer of the within desired me to sign my name to it. I know 
not whether it is right or wrong. Yesterday I think I sent you a let- 
ter of his, endorsed in such way as I thought proper. 2 
Aug. 28. 1861. A. 



1 AES, DLC-Cameron Papers. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter pre- 
pared by L. A. Bargie as follows: "L. A. Bargie, who proposes to go to Colorado 
Territory, to assist in the organisation of a Regiment there, wishes to obtain some 
military books, and some side-arms. I request that you will direct them to be 
given to him." 2 The endorsement has not been located. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

August 28, 1861 

Mr, Bell was very well recommended for one of the high offices in 
the Customs for San Francisco; but among the many applicants 
so recommended, did not succeed A. LUNTCOLIST 

Aug. 28, 1861 

[500] 



AUGUST 2Q, l86l 

1 AES, owned by Milton H. Shutes, Oakland, California. Lincoln's endorsement 
is written on the envelope of a letter from Samuel Bell to Senator James A. Mo 
Dougall of California, August 14, 1861, requesting appointment as paymaster. 
There is no record of his appointment. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

I am quite willing that Senator Harris shall be gratified in the re- 
quest made within. A. LINGOLTST 
Aug. 28. 1861. 

1 AES, IHi. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a note from Senator Ira Harris 
requesting that James B. Swain of New York City be appointed quartermaster 
with rank of major. Swain was appointed second lieutenant in the First Cavalry 
Regular Army, November i, 1861. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

August 28, 1861 

I personally know Mr. Tanner to be an active, intelligent busi- 
ness-like man, & I understand him to be of unimpeachable char- 
acter. A. LINCOLN 
Aug. 28, 1861 

1 AES, owned by Herman Blum, Blumhaven Library, Philadelphia. Lincoln's 
endorsement is written on a letter from Philip Dorsheimer, a prominent Repub- 
lican of Buffalo, New York, August 22, 1861, recommending Henry Tanner of 
Buffalo for local commissary. There is no record of Tanner's appointment. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

These are good recommendations, as the Sec. of War -will see. I ask 
respectful consideration for them. A. LUSTCOUNT 

Aug. 29, 1861 

1 AES-P, ISLA. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of a letter from 
Bland Ballard, Louisville, Kentucky, August 20, 1861, asking that his brother- 
in-law William. P. McDowell, a cousin of Brigadier General Irvin McDowell, be 
given a commission. Although the middle initial is not clearly "P" in Ballard's 
letter, it seems possible that William P. McDowell, appointed first lieutenant and 
adjutant in the Fifteenth Kentucky Infantry December 14, 1861, was the same 
man. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

I am quite as willing that Mr. Gamage or Saunders shall be an 
Assistant Quarter Master, or Commissary, as to be a Paymaster. 
Aug. 29. 1861 A. 

[501] 



AUGUST 29, l86l 

1 AES, DLC-Cameron Papers. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from 
General James W. Denver, August 26, 1861, stating that although he had no ob- 
jection to Samuel Gamage's and Charles K. Saunders' appointment to places 
". . . on the staff of the Gal. expedition ... it is due to fair dealing to state that 
today Gen. Cameron, Sec. of War, told me ... he had appointed Staff officers 
enough for the whole army and that he could make no new appointments until 
those already appointed -were assigned to duty." See also Lincoln to Cameron Au- 
gust 17, supra, and September 4, infra., in regard to these appointments. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

August 29, 1861 

The writer of this was an M.C. from N.J. when I was from Ills, 
and has since been Governor of New- Jersey. If his brother can 
now consistently be made a Pay-Master, I shall be glad of it if 
not, let his name be placed so he can have a chance at no very dis- 
tant day. A. LINCOLN 
Aug. 29, 1861 

1 AES, owned by R. E. Burdick, New York City. Lincoln's endorsement is 
written on the back of a letter from. William A. Newell of Allentown, New Jer- 
sey, August 28, 1861, requesting appointment of his brother John W. Newell as 
paymaster. The appointment was made September 5, 1861. 



To Salmon E Chase 1 

Sec. of Treasury please see J. S. Beard, bearer of this. 
Aug. 29, 1861 A. Liisrcousr 

1 ALS, IBloHi. Joseph S. Beard was a resident of Bloomington, Illinois, who 
had lost his job in the Post Office Department as route agent in Illinois. No Treas- 
ury Department appointment is of record, but the U. S Official Register lists 
"Joseph Li. Beard" as route agent in Illinois, which suggests that Beard was reap- 
pointed to his old job, the Register being in error as to the middle initial. 



To Winfield Scott 1 

Sent to me by the Attorney General, and now respectfully sub- 
mitted to Lieut. General Scott. A. LINCOLN" 
Aug. 29, 1861. 

1 AES, DLC-B.TL. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of a letter from 
Nicholas E Trist of Philadelphia to Edward Bates, August 26, 1861, calling atten- 
tion to the atrocities committed by Union marauders, and suggesting that steps 
should be taken to punish crimes of rape, murder, etc. General Scott's reply of 
August 30, written below Lincoln's endorsement, called attention to the fact that 
the same strict order which he had issued during the Mexican War to curb ma- 
rauding had been sent to Senator Lyman Trumbull for insertion in a judiciary 
bill to punish marauders. 

[502] 



To Winfield Scott 1 

August 29, 1861 

Will Gen. Scott please give his opinion whether anything, and 
if anything, what should be done in Major Cross' case. 
Aug. 29, 1861. A. 



I am unwilling to act in this case in opposition to Gen. Scott's 
views. A. LINCOLN 

Sep. 6 9 1861 

1 AES, RPB. Lincoln's endorsements are written on a letter from Major Os- 
born Cross, San Francisco, California, July 29, 1861, asking that the president 
remit the remainder of his suspension from duty. Major Gross, a disbursing officer, 
had been court-martialed for a deficiency in his accounts which ". . was paid 
up by me nearly one year before I was brought before a Court Martial, even at 
that time a greater portion was shown to accrue from errors. ... I have been a 
disbursing officer over thirty three years, and . . . not a dollar has been 
lost. . . ." General Scott's reply of September 5, written between Lincoln's en- 
dorsements, declined to recommend further clemency. Major Cross was returned 
to duty when his suspension expired and was promoted to lieutenant colonel, Feb- 
ruary 26, 1863. 



To Lorenzo Thomas 1 

If the places are not already full, let Dr. Anthony Dignowitz, be 
examined for an appointment as a surgeon. A. LINCOLN 

Aug. 29, 1861 

1 ALS, The Rosenbach Company, Philadelphia and New York. Dr. Anthony M. 
Dignowitz wrote Lincoln from Baltimore, June 15, 1861, that he would like to 
serve his adopted country (DLC-Nicolay Papers), and General Don C. Buell wrote 
October 22, 1861, recommending him for an appointment, as a Texas citizen whose 
Union sympathies had forced him to leave the state (DLC-RTL), but no record 
has been found of his appointment. 



To Lorenzo Thomas 1 

Let the appointment be made, as within requested by Genl. Mc- 
Clellan. A. LINCOLN 

Aug. 30, 1861 

i Parke-Bernet Catalog 972, May 17, 1948, No. 299- According to the catalog 
description, Lincoln's endorsement is written on the last page of a letter from 
McClellan, August 30, 1861. The register of letters received by the adjutant gen- 
eral (DNA WR RG 94) indicates that this missing item concerned the appoint- 
ment of Major Lawrence P. Graham, as brigadier general, and the appointment of 
seven other officers recommended by McClellan. Graham was appointed August 
31, 1861. 

[503] 



To Simon Cameron 1 

August 31, 1861 

Respectfully submitted to the War Department, with the remark 
that if arms were in the hands of a Union Regiment in N.C. they 
probably would not remain in their hands long. 

Aug. 31. 1861. A. LINCOLN 

1 AES, DLC-Cameron Papers. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of 
a letter from Charles H. Foster, Salisbury, North Carolina, August 9, 1861, to 
Ward H. Lanion, tendering the services of a regiment of loyal North Carolinians 
if it can be accepted and equipped. Foster, an unconditional Union candidate, was 
elected to congress in the First Congressional District of North Carolina, in No- 
vember, 1861, -under a provisional state government which later collapsed. Con- 
gress denied him his seat on the ground that he had received only 400 votes in 
a district of 9,000 voters. 

To Acting Secretary of State 1 

Hon. Sec. of State Executive Mansion 

Dear Sir Aug. 31. 1861 

Mr. Eastman says the person appointed Consul to Cardiff de- 
clines. If so, please let it stand till Mr. W. H. Seward, arrives. I 
believe he sympathizes with me in the wish to make Mr. East- 
man's position somewhat elegible. Yours truly A.' LINCOLN 

1 ALS, NAuE. James C. Slaght of Brooklyn, New York, declined appoint- 
ment as consul to Cardiff, England, on being offered a captaincy in the quarter- 
master's department, to which he 'was appointed September 2, 1861. Zebina East- 
man was appointed consul to Bristol rather than Cardiff. 

To George B. McClellan 1 

[September, 1861] 

May I not now appoint Stevens a Brig. Genl? I wish to do it. 
Maj. Genl. McClellan. A LmcoLisr 

1 AL.S, DLC-McClellan Papers. Isaac I. Stevens who had taken command of the 
Seventy-ninth New York Infantry to replace Colonel James Cameron, killed at 
Bull Run, was a West Point graduate (1835) who had resigned as brevet major 
in 1853 to become governor of Washington Territory. Humiliated by the rapid 
advancement of his juniors over him, he was on the point of resigning (Frederick 
A. Aiken to Seward, September 25, 1861, DLC-RTL), but was appointed brigadier 
general of Volunteers, September 28, 1861. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War. Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: Sep. 2. 86 1 

Let Brigadier Generals of volunteers be appointed as follow: 
Daniel E. Sickles, of New- York. 
O. O. Howard, and Charles D. Jameson, of Maine 

[504] 



SEPTEMBER 2, l86l 

A. Me. D. McCook, of Ohio 

Ebenezer Dumont, Robert H. Milroy, and Lewis Wallace, of 
Indiana. 

William A. Richardson, and Eleazer A. Paine, of Illinois. 

Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

i ALS, IHi. Colonel Daniel E. Sickles of the Seventieth New York, Colonel 
Oliver O. Howard of the Third Maine, Colonel Charles D. Jameson of the Second 
Maine, Captain Alexander McDowell McCook of the Third Infantry Regular 
Army, Colonel Ebenezer Dumont of the Seventh Indiana, Colonel Robert H. Mil- 
roy of the Ninth Indiana, Colonel Lewis Wallace of the Eleventh Indiana, and 
Colonel Eleazer A. Paine of the Ninth Illinois were all appointed brigadiers on 
September 3, 1861. William A. Richardson's appointment of the same date seems 
not to have been accepted as there is no record of his service as brigadier. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

[c. September 2, 1861] 

I think it is well that E is away from the N.H. people. He will 
do less harm anywhere else; and, by when he has gone, his neigh- 
bors will understand him better. A. L. 

1 AES, DLC-Cameron Papers. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter by 
Henry McFarland, editor of the Concord, New Hampshire, The Statesman to M. 
B. Goodwin, September 2, 1861, which Cameron had referred to the president. 
McFarland noted that ". . . Ex President Pierce is at Louisville, Ky. There is a 
very general suspicion here that his mission there is not one friendly to the gov- 
ernment. ... If the government has any way to observe his motions I hope it 
will do so. . . ." 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Let the appointments be made as recommended by Genl. Mo 
Clellan A LUNTCOLK 

Sep. 2. 1861. 

1 AES, KPB. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of McClellan's letter 
to Cameron, August 29, 1861, recommending that Major Lawrence P. Graham 
of the Second Dragoons and Colonel John Sedgwick of the Fourth Cavalry be ap- 
pointed brigadiers. Both appointments were made, dated as of August 31, 1861. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Let the appointment be made as within requested. 
Sept. 2. 1861 A. LINCOUNT 

1 AES, owned by Richard F. Lufkin, Boston, Massachusetts. Lincoln's endorse- 
ment has been removed from attendant papers. Beneath the endorsement, 
Brigadier General James W. Bipley endorsed on September 14: 

"Respectfully returned. As directed I have to report in this case. That Lt. 

[505] 



SEPTEMBER 2, 1 8 6 1 

Harris has not been in service three months, and is not eligible to this appoint- 
ment, under the s6th. Paragraph of army regulations, until he shall have served 
with his corps at least three years. So urgent is the demand for the services of 
Ordnance Officers on their appropriate duties that none can be spared for detached 
service, without great injury to the operations of the Department -which have 
been already much crippled by the withdrawal of officers for such service It will 
be a lasting disadvantage to any young officer of the ordnance Corps to detach 
him from his appropriate duties, before he has had an opportunity to attain a 
practical knowledge of them and may injure him professionally for life These 
are serious objections both as regards the public interest and those of the officer 
himself which were probably not known or considered, when this paper was 
endorsed." 

Lieutenant William H. Harris, son of Senator Ira Harris of New York, 
graduated from West Point in June, 1861, and on August 3, was commissioned 
second lieutenant in the Ordnance Department. 

To John C. Fremont 1 

Private and confidential. 
Major General Fremont: Washington D.C. Sept. 2, 1861. 

My dear Sir: Two points in your proclamation of August 3oth 
give me some anxiety. First, 2 should you shoot a man, according 
to the proclamation, the Confederates would very certainly shoot 
our best man in their hands in retaliation; and so, man for man, 
indefinitely. It is therefore my order that you allow no man to be 
shot, under the proclamation, without first having my approbation 
or consent. 

Secondly, 3 I think there is great danger that the closing para- 
graph, in relation to the confiscation of property, and the liberat- 
ing slaves of traiterous owners, will alarm our Southern Union 
friends, and turn them against us perhaps ruin our rather fair 
prospect for Kentucky. Allow me therefore to ask, that you will as 
of your own motion, modify that paragraph so as to conform to the 
first and fourth sections of the act of Congress, entitled, "An act to 
confiscate property used for insurrectionary purposes," approved 
August, 6th, 1861, and a copy of which act I herewith send you. 
This letter is written in a spirit of caution and not of censure. 

I send it by a special messenger, in order that it may certainly 
and speedily reach you. Yours very truly A. LINCOLN 

[Endorsement] 

Copy of letter sent to Gen. Fremont, by special messenger leav- 
ing Washington Sep. 3. 1861. 

1 Copy, DLC-RTL. The copy is in Nicolay's handwriting but the endorsement 
is in Lincoln's handwriting. Among the adverse reactions to Fremont's proclama- 
tion was a telegram from James Speed, Louisville, September 3, 1861, which 
expressed the positive opinion that ". , . that foolish proclamation of Fremont. 

[506] 



SEPTEMBER 4, l86l 

. . . will crush out every vistage of a union party in the state. . . .** (DLC-RTL) . 

2 Fremont's reply of September 8, in regard to this point was as follows: "I do 
not think the enemy can either misconstrue it, or urge any thing against it, or 
undertake . . . unusual retaliation. . . . The article does not at all refer to 
ordinary prisoners of war. ... I have to ask that you will permit me to carry 
out upon the spot the provisions of the proclamation in this respect. . . ." (DLC- 
RTL). The language of Fremont's proclamation, however, was: "All persons who 
shall be taken with arms in their hands within these lines shall be tried by court- 
martial, and if found guilty will be shot." (OR, I, III, 466-67). 

3 Fremont's reply of September 8, in regard to this point was, "If . . , your 
better judgement still decides that I am wrong in the article respecting the lib- 
eration of slaves, I have to ask that you will openly direct me to make the cor- 
rection. ... I acted with full deliberation and . . . the conviction that it was 
. . . right and necessary. I still think so." (DLC-RTL) . 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Gen. Cooper has all the while been under the special care of Gen. 
Cameron; and I am quite willing it should continue so. 
Sep. 3. 1861. A. 



1 AES, IHi. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from Brigadier General 
James Cooper to Cameron, August 30, 1861, suggesting that David P. DeWitt and 
John Sommers be appointed majors, and that ". . . an able and experienced 
officer as Chief of my Staff . . . [be appointed] as early as practicable." DeWitt 
was appointed major September 21, and Sommers was appointed colonel October 
8, 1861, in the Maryland Volunteers. 

Appointment of Gustavns V. Fox 1 

Executive Mansion 4 September, 1861 

During the temporary absence of the Hon: Gideon Welles, Sec- 
retary of the Navy, from the seat of Government, I hereby ap- 
point Mr. Gustavus V. Fox, Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Act- 
ing Secretary of the Navy. ABRAHAM LINCOLN. 

1 Confidential Correspondence of G-ustavus Vasa Fox . . . , edited by Robert 
M. Thompson and Richard Wainright (New York, 1918), I, 371. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

September 4, 1861 

If there is any vacant place, of Regimental Quarter-Master, or Com- 
misary, which can fairly be charged to California, do let Mr. Sam- 
uel Gamage have it. A. LINCOLN 

Sept. 4. 1861. 

1 AES, owned by Edgar Jessup, Piedmont, California. Lincoln's endorsement is 
written on the back of a copy of Lincoln to Cameron, August 17, 1861 (supra). 
See also the note dated August 29, supra. 

[507] 



To Simon Cameron 1 

September 4, 86 

I sincerely wish Mr. Hawley be made a Brigade Commissary of 
Subsistance. In his worthiness, & the interest felt for him by good 
people, his case is something more than a common one, & I hope 
he be appointed. A. LINCOLN 

Sep. 4. 1861. 

1 AES, CCamStJ. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from Samuel 
Bowles, Springfield, Massachusetts, August 23, 1861, recommending William A. 
Hawley for an appointment. William A. Hawley "of Illinois" was appointed 
quartermaster with rank of captain, October 31, 1861, but it is not certain that 
he was the same man recommended by Bowles. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

September 4, 1861. 

I think provision should at once be made for organizing a force 
in Eastern Maryland, as recommended by Governor Hicks and 
General Dix. Let it be done at once, if possible. A. LINCOLN. 

1 OR, III, I, 480. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from Governor 
Thomas H. Hicks to Cameron, September 3, 1861, introducing Colonel Arthur G. 
Willis and asking that he be furnished with tents and subsistence for the First 
Regiment of Maryland Eastern Shore Infantry and that the Second Regiment 
should be organized forthwith. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

September 4, 1861 

Mr. Linton had ample recommendations for another office; he 
served three months with the N.J. troops, as I understand; and I 
suppose he is very worthy of the place he now seeks. I ask a care- 
ful consideration of his case. A. LINCOLN 
Sep. 4. 1861. 

1 AES, IHi. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of a letter from John 
L. Linton of Beverly, New Jersey, September 3, 1861, asking appointment to the 
quartermaster department. Although he had served as quartermaster in the 
Fourth New Jersey Militia, April 27 July 31, 1861, no further appointment is 
of record. 

To Heads of Departments and Bureaus 1 

I shall be very glad if any of the Heads of Departments, or Bu- 
reaus, can give this lady some suitable employment. 
Sept. 4. 1861. A. 

[508] 



SEPTEMBER 5, l86l 

1 AES, owned by Charles W. Olsen, Chicago, Illinois. According to a clipping 
from an unidentified printed source pasted below this note, Lincoln's recommen- 
dation referred to "Miss Anne Mary Griffin, for many years a clerk in Washing- 
ton," but the U.S. Official Register does not list her. 

To William H. Seward 1 

September 4, 1861 

If there is a Consulate at St. Helena, which is open, I have no ob- 
jection to its' going to Mr. William Moran., especially as he brings 
a letter from Hon Thadeus Stevens who has not troubled us much. 
Sept. 4. 1861 A. LiisrcoLiNr 

1 AES, DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 348. Lincoln's endorsement is 
written on a letter from Representative Thaddeus Stevens, dated August 29, 1861, 
recommending William Moran of Pennsylvania. Although the New York Trib- 
une., September 24, 1861, lists William Moran as consul to St. Helena, appointed 
September 6, the U.S. Official Register does not list him either in 1861 or 1863. 

To William H. Seward 1 

September 4, 1861 

It Is said the Governorship of Washington Territory is vacant & 
within it is asked that it shall not be filled without a hearing. Sec. 
of State, please remember this. A. LirccoLiNr 

Sept. 4. 1861 

* AES, DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 281. Lincoln's endorsement is writ- 
ten on a letter from Charles Evans, Philadelphia, to William D. ICelley, Septem- 
ber 2, 1861, asking that in his interview with the president, KLelley remember 
Elwood Evans for the governorship of Washington. "William Pickering of Illinois 
was appointed governor (see Lincoln to Pickering, October 7, infra), but Elwood 
Evans was later nominated secretary of Washington Territory, January 7, 1863. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

I approve the carrying this through carefully, cautiously, and 
expeditiously. Avoid conflicts and interference. 

Sep 5. l86l. A. LHN"COL3NT. 

1 Copy, DLC-Cameron Papers. The copy of Lincoln's endorsement is on a copy 
of a letter to Cameron from "Herman Boker & Co./ 50 Cliff Street New York," 
September 4, 1861, offering 100,000 rifled percussion muskets and 18,000 sabres, 
purchased in Europe, subject to inspection and approval* 

To Simon Cameron 1 

September 5, 1861 
President Lincoln's opinion 
(Given to Sec'y Cameron, Sec'y of War) 

Regarding the stoppage of the emoluments of Col. Gates under 
the provisions of the 2Oth. Section of the Act of Congress 3rd. Aug 

[509] 



SEPTEMBER 5, l86l 

1861 "I have examined the 2Oth. Section of the Act of Congress 
entitled an Act for the better organization of the Army, approved 
3rd. Aug. 1861 and am of opinion that officers, whose cases fall 
within it, should be paid according to the old law up to the pas- 
sage of the new (3 Aug. 1861) (signed) A. LINCOLN 

Sept 5th. 1861. 

A true copy from the original, which was sent to the Hon. Sec'y 
of War, Mr Cameron. 5 Sept. 1861. (signed) WM. GATES 

Col. U.S.A. 

This opinion was not regarded by Mr. Cameron or any other per- 
son (not an order) they said. 

[Endorsement: To Edward Bates] 2 

Will the Attorney General please say whether the within is, or 
is not a sound legal opinion? A. LINCOLN 

Aug. 18, 1864 

1 Copy and AES, DLC-RTL The original opinion written by Lincoln has not 
been located. The endorsement of August 18, 1864, is in Lincoln's autograph on 
the back of the copy. Gates wrote to Lincoln, September 28, 1861, *' . I received 
your confirmation of your first opinion . . . and presented it with the first opin- 
ion to the Pay Master General and demanded a restoration of the money stopped 
out of my pay for the month of August last which he declined . . . without an 
order from the War Depart. . . ." (DCL-RTL) The twentieth section of the law 
referred to stipulated that officers when absent from duty more than six months 
should not receive allowances for servants, forage, etc. 

2 Bates was leaving Washington when Lincoln's communication arrived, and J. 
Hubley Ashton, assistant attorney general, answered August 26, 1864, "The view 
expressed by your Excellency ... is a perfectly sound one. . . ." (Ibid}. 
Whether Gates "was ever able to collect has not been determined. 

To Winfield Scott 1 

[c. September 5, 1861] 

"Will Gen. Scott please look at the within and inform me whether 
the guns were ordered to Cairo yesterday? A. LINCOLN 

1 AES, DLC-RTL. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of a translation 
of a telegram from General Fremont to "Mr. A. J deZeyk," September 5, 1861. 
Albert J. Dezeyfc, a Hungarian by birth, was a clerk in the Post Office Department, 
and the explanation for Fremont's sending it in Hungarian seems to be the desire 
for secrecy. The translation is in part as follows: "Please to communicate with 
the President . . The "War Vessels of the enemy are all steel plated mounting 
heavy guns, better armed faster and larger than ours. Their Officers are all of the 
U.S. Navy, whilst our Officers can not hold their ground after the first fire; there 
can be no other result than our capture; there is a very urgent want in Cairo of 
heavy canons. . . . The enemy is beggining to occupy the coast of Kentucky 
Hyckman Paducah &c. I think, the time, has come to have command extended 
to those parts (probably means Kentucky) . . . ." Scott's reply has not been lo- 
cated. 

[SID] 



To William EL Seward 1 

Sec. of State, please see, and converse with Gen. Kimmel, who is a 
State Senator of Frederick, Maryland. A. LINCOLN 

Sep. 5. 1861 

1 ALS, NbO. Anthony Z. Kimmel was commanding general of the Fourth 
Division of Maryland Militia. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

September 6, 1861 

Hon. Jno. Crowell of Ohio presents this. Please hear him fully & 
do the best for him you can. 

1 American Art Association Anderson Galleries Catalog 4221, January 14-15, 
1936, No. 350. According to the catalog description this communication is written 
on a letter from Major George S. Mygatt of the Forty-first Ohio Volunteers. John 
Crowell, editor and ex-congressman of Cleveland, was a major general of Ohio 
Militia. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Will War Department please consider the within request of Gov. 
Pierpont? A. LINCOLN 

Sep. 6. 1861 

1 AES, DLC-Cameron Papers. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from 
Governor Francis EC. Peirpomt, Wheeling, Virginia, September 3, 1861, on the 
necessity for calling out eight or ten Volunteer regiments in West Virginia, Ohio, 
and Western Pennsylvania to occupy West Virginia and crush out secession. The 
letter is signed "F. H. Peirpoint," and this spelling is followed throughout 
the present work rather than "Pierpoint" or "Pierpont," on the assumption that 
the governor is entitled to spell his name as he chooses, other considerations not- 
withstanding. 



To Lorenzo Thomas 1 

Let Col. Gorman be appointed as recommended by GenL Scott. 
Sep. 6, 1861. A LINCOLN 

1 AES, B.PB. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from Lieutenant 
Colonel Stephen Miller of the First Minnesota Regiment, August 17, 1861, rec- 
ommending that Colonel Willis A. Gorman of the same regiment he made a brig- 
adier general. Winfield Scott endorsed "I cordially unite in recommending. . . ." 
Gorman was appointed brigadier general, September 7, 1861. 

[511] 



To Zachariah Chandler 1 

Hon. Z. Chandler Washington, B.C. 

My dear Sir: Sep. 7. 1861 

Dr. William Brodie, of Detroit, is very amply recommended to 
be a Surgeon in the Army (volunteers) ; but understanding that 
yourself and Senator Bingham have some objection, I forbear to 
act until I can hear from you & him. Please confer with him, and 
write me. Looking at the papers here, he ought to be appointed; 
and it embarrasses me some to refuse. Yours truly 

A. 



1 ALS, DLC-Chandler Papers. Dr. William Brodie was appointed brigade sur- 
geon of Volunteers as of August 3, 1861. The appointment was sent to the Senate 
December 24, 1861, and rejected January 15, 1862. 

Memorandum 1 

The writer of this is a worthy young man, and his father a most 
intelligent & valuable citizen. A. LINCOLN 

Sep. 7. 1861. 

1 ADS, MeHi. Clipped from the letter to which it refers, this communication 
is without further reference. 

Memorandum: Interview with Philip L. Fox 1 

Executive, Mansion Sep. 7. 1861. 

This day Philip L. Fox, of Philadelphia, is introduced to me by 
Friend Newton, 2 and says that within this week, in this City, 
Gilead Smith, who Mr. Fox says is to sail from New- York next 
Wednesday, as a government agent to purchase arms in Europe, 
called on him (Fox) and, in presence of two others, F. N. Buck, 
and Martin Thomas, both of Philda., spoke of arms which Mr. Fox 
knew of for sale, and asked Fox what would be the price, and 
being told $i5-i7-& 19 proposed to join in purchasing them and 
putting them on the government at $22. to $27. and dividing the 
profits. Mr. Buck introduced Smith to Mr. Fox. Mr. Fox says he 
replied that he was not a seller, and desired having no more to do 
with the matter than to let the government know where the arms 
were to be purchased. Mr. Buck and Mr. Thomas call and say 
they heard a conversation with Smith & Fox that Fox was trying 
to sell a lot of arms upon the sale of which he, Fox, was to have a 
commission of 50 cents per gun that Smith and not, as they 
understood, represent himself to an agent of the government; but 
did propose to Fox to join him in getting the guns on to the gov- 

[512] 



SEPTEMBER Q, l86l 

ernment at a price which leave a profit for them to divide, & they 
understood Fox to agree to it. Neither Smith nor Fox professing 
to be a government agent nothing appeared wrong in their con- 
versation. Both are men of good character & Smith is brother-in- 
law to John Edgar Thompson. 

1 AD, DLC-RTL. No further record of this deal has been found. 

2 Probably Isaac Newton, whom Lincoln nominated commissioner of agricul- 
ture May 16, 1862. 

To Lorenzo Thomas 1 

Adjt. Genl. please tell me how this case stands. 

Sep. 7. 1861. A. LINCOLN 

1 AES, DL.C-B.TL. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from Joab Wil- 
kinson, Niantic, Illinois, to Nicolay, August 26, 1861, inquiring about his appoint- 
ment as captain. Lorenzo Thomas endorsed in reply to Lincoln's request that the 
commission had been sent to the president and as soon as signed would be for- 
warded. "Wilkinson's appointment had been confirmed by the Senate on August 5 
and announced in AGO General Orders No. 65, August 23, 1861. Joab Wilkin- 
son was a brother of Senator Morton S Wilkinson of Minnesota. 

To David Hunter 1 

Major GenL David Hunter Washington D.C. Sep. 9. 1861 

My dear Sir: Gen. Fremont needs assistance which it is difficult 
to give him. He is losing the confidence of men near him, whose 
support any man in his position must have to be successful. His 
cardinal mistake is that he isolates himself, & allows nobody to see 
him; and by "which he does not know what is going on in. the very 
matter he is dealing with. He needs to have, by his side, a man of 
large experience. Will you not, for me, take that place? Your rank 
is one grade too high to be ordered to it; but will you not serve 
the country, and oblige me, by taking it voluntarily? 

l ADf, DLC-RTL. Francis P. Blair, Jr., to Montgomery Blair, September i, 
1861, " . . . Affairs are becoming quite alarming. . . . Men coming here to give 
information are not allowed to approach Fremont, and go away in disgust .... 
he throws himself behind the reports of his officers who are trying to prevaricate 
and shield themselves .... he still clings to them & refuses to see for himself. 
. . . My decided opinion is that he should be relieved of his command and a 
man of ability put in his place." (Ibid ). Winfield Scott to Lincoln, September 5, 
1861, "If . . . Hunter could be brought in close relations with . . . Fremont 
some rash measures might be staved off & good ones accepted by insinuation, but 
H.'s rank is too high, by one degree to put him on duty as 'the chief of staff'. . . . 
(ibid.). The letter to Hunter was carried by Montgomery C. Meigs and Mont- 
gomery Blair who went to St. Louis to inspect conditions. Hunter was placed in 
command at Holla, Missouri, and on October 24, Fremont was ordered to ". . . call 
Major-General Hunter, of the U. S. Volunteers, to relieve him temporarily in that 
command, when he (Major-General Fremont) will report to General Headquar- 
ters, by letter, for further orders." (OR, I, III, 553). 

[513] 



To William H. Seward 1 

September 9, 1861 

If Gov. Bebb has declined, or resigned the Consulship at Tangiers, 
I have no objection to its' being given to Judge DeLong. 

Sep. 9. 1861 A. LINCOLN 

If Gov. Bebb has resigned the Consulship at Tangiers, let Judge 
James DeLong, of Ohio, be appointed to the place. 

Sep. 16. 1861 A. LINCOLN 

1 AES, DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 270. Both endorsements are writ- 
ten on the "back of a letter of August i, 1861, from William Bebb, ex- governor 
of Ohio (1846-1848) who was appointed an examiner in the Patent Office upon 
refusing the consulship. Bebb recommended James DeLong of Ohio, who was 
appointed consul at Tangier but was rejected by the Senate July 12, 1862. He 
was later appointed and confirmed as consul at Aux-Cayes. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

September 10, 1861 

Mr. Blair, senr. does not make many recommendations; but as is 
seen, makes this very warmly. I have no doubt Mr. Moses is a 
most competent & worthy man, & if there be a vacant place not 
committed to any other good man, I should be pleased for him 
to be appointed. A. LINCOLN 

Sep. 10. 1861. 

1 AES, DLC-Cameron Papers. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a copy of 
a letter from Francis P Blair, Sr., to Cameron, May 9, 1861, recommending ap- 
pointment of Isaac Moses of New York as paymaster. Moses was appointed as- 
sistant adjutant general with rank of captain, September 25, 1861. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Let Charles F. Van Duser, son of the gentleman named within, 
be appointed a ist. Lieutenant, if there is any vacancy. 

Sept. 10, 1861. A. LnsrcoLisr 

1 AES, owned By Gordon A. Block, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Lincoln's en- 
dorsement is written on a letter from John J. Cisco introducing Selah Van Duzer. 
Charles F. Van Duzer was appointed second lieutenant in the Twelfth Infantry, 
September 25, 1861. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Let Gov. Morton be obliged by the appointment o Mr. Western, 
as Qr. Master, or Commissary, if it can consistently be done. 
Sep. 10. 1861 A. 

[514] 



SEPTEMBER 1O, l86l 

1 AES, IHi. Lincoln's endorsement appears on a letter of Governor Oliver 
P. Morton, August 29, 1861, recommending John Weston of Elkhart, Indiana, 
for appointment as a brigade quartermaster. No record has "been found of 
Weston's appointment. 



Draft of Order Authorizing Benjamin F. Butler 
to Raise a Volunteer Force 1 

War Department. Washington. Sept loth. 1861 

Major General B. F. Butler, is hereby authorized to raise, organize, 
arm, uniform and equip a Volunteer force for the War, in the New 
England States, not exceeding Six (6) Regiments, o the Maximum 
Standard, of such arms, and in such proportions and in such man- 
ner, as he may Judge expedient, and for this purpose, his orders 
and requisitions on the Quartermasters, Ordnance, and other Staff 
Departments of the Army, are to be obeyed and answered, pro- 
vided, the cost of such recruitment, armament and equippment, 
does not exceed in the aggregate, that of like troops, now, or here- 
after raised for the service of the United States. But this order is 
to be of no effect, unless the Governor of each State from which 
troops are to be enlisted, shall indorse his approval upon it, or on 
a copy thereof. 

1 ADf-P, ISLA. Only the last sentence is in Lincoln's autograph. The final copy 
of this order, signed by Cameron and bearing Lincoln's endorsement "Ap- 
proved, Sep. 12, 1861 /A. Lincoln" (AES-P., ISLA) does not have the additional 
sentence inserted by Lincoln, but before Lincoln approved it on September 12, 
he sent his telegram to the New England Governors, September 11, infra. 

To Mrs. John C. Fremont 1 

Now, at once. A. Liisrcoi^sr 

Sept. 10 [1861] 

1 Allan Nevins, Fremont, Pathmarker of the West (1939), p. 516. According to 
Nevins* description, Lincoln sent a card containing this brief communication 
granting an interview to Mrs. Fremont who brought a letter and verbal com- 
munications from her husband. For an account of the interview see the source 
indicated. 

To Justus McKinstry 1 

Washington, September 10, 1861 
J. McKinstry, Brigadier General and Quartermaster, St. Louis: 

Permit me to introduce James L. Lamb, Esq., of Springfield, Il- 
linois. 

[515] 



SEPTEMBER 1 O, l86l 

I have known Mr. Lamb for a great many years. His reputation 
for integrity and ability to carry out his engagements are both 
unquestioned, and I shall be pleased, if consistent with the public 
good, that you will make purchases of him of any army supplies 
needed in your Department. Your obedient servant, 

A. LlKTCOLKT. 

1 Vindication of Brig. Gen. J. McKinstry. . . . (1862), p. 17. Concerning 
McKinstry's dismissal, see Lincoln's approval of General Order No. 43, January 
28, 1863, infra. 

Memorandum: Appointment of John S. Godfrey 1 

[c. September 10, 1861] 

Gen: Hooker wishes - Godfrey, now Q 3YL and. N.H. to be 
appointed a Brigade Q.M. for his Brigade. He is now acting as 
such. Senator Hale, Hon. Mr. Rollins, & Col. Marston, 2 all back 
this application. 

1 AD, DLC-RTL. First Lieutenant John S. Godfrey's promotion to captain and 
assistant quartermaster of Volunteers, dating from September 10, 1861, was sent 
to the Senate in a list of similar promotions under date of December 21. General 
Hooker's request may have been made at any time between these dates, but evi- 
dence for more specific dating of Lincoln's memorandum has not been found. 

2 Senator John P Hale and Representative Edward H. Rollins of New Hamp- 
shire and Colonel Gilman Marston of the Tenth New Hampshire Infantry. 

Order Approving Sentence of William H. Allen 1 

Washington, September 10, 1861. 

The proceedings, findings, and sentence of the Court in the case 
of Colonel William H. Allen, ist Regiment New York Volunteers, 
are confirmed and approved. A. 



1 AGO, General Orders No. 76, September 10, 1861. Colonel Allen had been 
found guilty of disobedience of orders, maliciously causing private property to 
be destroyed, conduct unbecoming an officer and a gentleman, and breach of 
arrest, and had been sentenced to be cashiered. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

I join in the above recommendation, if the appointment can be 
made consistently. A. LiisrcoLrsT 

Sept. 11, 1861. 

1 AES, owned by E. F. Slater, New York City. Lincoln's endorsement follows 
the recommendation of George B. McClellan on the back of a letter from William 
P Brinton of Jefferson County, Virginia, to Cameron, September 9, 1861, applying 
for appointment as first lieutenant of Cavalry. This document seems to have be- 
come "lost," and no appointment for Brinton is of record. An endorsement on 

[516] 



SEPTEMBER 11, l86l 

the back reads "Rec'd A.G.O. for entry Oct 4, 1866." William P. Brinton served, 
however, in the Fifty -ninth Pennsylvania and became lieutenant colonel of the 
Eighteenth Pennsylvania Cavalry, March i, 1863 to September 19, 1864, when 
he was wounded and captured at Opeguan, Virginia. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Executive Mansion Sep. 11. 1861 

This day Gen. Mansfield personally appears, and urges that Ho- 
ratio G. Wright, of Topographical Engineers, be a Brigadier Gen- 
eral of Volunteers, as a Connecticut appointment. Gen. Totten 
concurs, as Gen. Mansfield says. 

1 ALS, IHi. Horatio G. Wright was appointed brigadier general of Volunteers 
September 14, 1861. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

War Department, please oblige Gen. McClernand, if possible. 
Sep. 11, 1861. A. LINCOLN 

1 AES, owned by Charles Putnam, Jr., Peoria, Illinois. Lincoln's endorsement 
is written on the back of a telegram from John A. McClernand requesting that 
First Lieutenant James H. Wilson of the Topographical Engineers be assigned to 
his staff at Cairo, Illinois. Wilson was assigned instead to the expedition which 
captured Port Royal, South Carolina, November 7, 1861 See also Lincoln to 
Lorenzo Thomas, September 17, infra. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

September 11, 1861 

I have before said, and now repeat, that by* the within, and other 
sources of information, I have no doubt of the fitness and worthi- 
ness of Mr. Markland to be a Paymaster, and I desire his appoint- 
ment if it can consist [ent]ly be made. A. LIJNTCOLI^. 
Sep. 11, 1861 

1 Stan. V. Henkels Catalog 1262, July i, 1920, No. 272. According to the catalog 
description, Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of a letter from Allen 
A. Burton, minister to Colombia, September 9, 1861, asking appointment of A. H. 
Markland as paymaster. No appointment of Markland as paymaster is of record, 
but the U.S. Official Register lists him in 1863 as special agent of the Post Office 
Department in Tennessee. 

To John C. Fremont 1 

Washington, D.C. 
Major General John C. Fremont. Sep. 11. 1861. 

Sir: Yours of the 8th. in answer to mine of and. Inst. is just re- 
ceived. Assuming that you, upon the ground, could better judge 

[517] 



SEPTEMBER 11, l86l 

of the necessities of your position than I could at this distance, on 
seeing your proclamation of August soth. I perceived no general 
objection to it. The particular clause, however, in relation to the 
confiscation of property and the liberation of slaves, appeared to 
me to be objectionable, in it's non-conformity to the Act of Con- 
gress passed the 6th. of last August upon the same subjects; and 
hence I wrote you expressing my wish that that clause should be 
modified accordingly. Your answer, just received, expresses the 
preference on your part, that I should make an open order for the 
modification, which I very cheerfully do. It is therefore ordered 
that the said clause of said proclamation be so modified, held, and 
construed, as to conform to, and not to transcend, the provisions on 
the same subject contained in the act of Congress entitled "An Act 
to confiscate property used for insurrectionary purposes" Ap- 
proved, August 6. 1861; and that said act be published at length 
with this order. Your Obt. Servt A. LINCOLN. 

i ADfS, DLC-RTL; LS copy, owned "by Crosby Noyes Boyd, Washington, D.C. 
The copy which, was given to the press bears Lincoln's endorsement across the 
top of the first page as follows: "The following letter from the President to Gen. 
Fremont was transmitted to the latter by mail, on the 12th. Inst." Across the 
bottom of the second page of the copy Lincoln wrote in parentheses, "The Act 
referred to commences on page 80, of pamphlet acts of congress of late session." 
The act of August 6, 1861, section 4, reads as follows: "Provided that any person 
held to service or labor, by laws of any State, to another, the owner of such claim 
to labor loses his claim if person held to labor is employed in hostile service against 
the government." (See Lincoln to Joseph Holt, September 12, infra ) On Sep- 
tember 16, Fremont telegraphed Lincoln, "I have seen in the papers your pub- 
lished telegram, to me. The original has never reached me. Shall I act on that?" 
(DLC-RTL). Lincoln's reply, if any, to Fremont's query has not been found, but 
Lorenzo Thomas to Cameron, October 21, 1861, specifies that ". . . one week 
after the receipt of the President's order modifying General Fremont's proclama- 
tion . . . General Fremont . . . required ... 200 copies of the original procla- 
mation . . . printed and sent immediately to Ironton [^Missouri] . . . for distri- 
bution through the country. . . ." (OR, I, IV, 543). See also Lincoln to Mrs. 
Fremont, September 12, infra. 

To New England Governors 1 

Sept. 11, 1861. 

Gen. Butler proposes raising in New-England, six regiments, to 
be recruited & commanded by himself & to go on special service. 
I shall be glad if you as Gov. of [blank] will answer by telegraph 
that you consent. A. LUSTCOLIS*. 

SiMoisr CAMERON, Prest. 

Sec. of War. 

1 ADf , RPB. The body of the draft of this telegram is in Lincoln's hand except- 
ing "will" following the blank, left for insertion of the state name. The date, Lin- 

[518] 



SEPTEMBER 12, l86l 

coin's name and Cameron's are added in Cameron's handwriting. Benjamin But- 
ler's proposed expedition to New Orleans had been under consideration since early 
August (see Lincoln to Cameron, August 2 and the draft of an order authorizing 
Butler's Volunteer force, September 10, supra). 

Replies from various New England governors on September 11 giving their 
approval are in the Official Records (III, I, 498, 499, 509). The text of Lincoln's 
letter to the New England governors, September 10, 1861, as printed in Private 
and Official Correspondence of Gen. Benjamin F. Butler (1917), I, 239, seems to 
be incorrect as to date and very unlike Lincoln m its wording. Since there seems 
to be no sufficient reason for supposing that Lincoln sent a communication on both 
September 10 and 11, the editors have omitted the text of the communication 
dated September 10, as printed in the Butler correspondence. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir Sep. 12. 1861 

Mr. Senator Latham asks authority for Don Andreas Pico to 
raise a Cavalry Regiment of native Mexican citizens of California. 
Hear Senator Latham upon the subject, and if it impresses you fa- 
vorably you have my approbation. Gen. Stoneman is with Sena- 
tor Latham, and vouches for the Don, and approves the plan gen- 
erally Yours truly A. 



1 ALS, DLC-Cameron Papers. In spite of General George Stoneman's and 
Senator Milton S. Latham's recommendations, there is no record of Don Andreas 
Pico's appointment. 



To Mrs. John C. Fremont 1 

Mrs. GenL Fremont Washington, D.C. Sep. 12. 1861 

My dear Madam Your two notes of to-day are before me. I 
answered the letter you bore me from Gen. Fremont, on yester- 
day; and not hearing from you during the day, I sent the answer 
to him by mail. 

It is not exactly correct, as you say you were told by the elder 
Mr. Blair, to say that I sent Post-Master-General Blair to St. Louis 
to examine into that Department, and report. Post-Master-General 
Blair did go, with my approbation, to see and converse with Gen. 
Fremont as a friend. 

I do not feel authorized to furnish you with copies of letters in 
my possession without the consent of the writers. 

No impression has been made on my mind against the honor or 
integrity of Gen. Fremont; and I now enter my protest against 
being understood as acting in any hostility towards him. Your Obt. 
Servt A. 

[519] 



SEPTEMBER 12, l86l 

1 ADfS, DLC-RTL. See Lincoln to David Hunter, September 9, and Lincoln to 
Fremont, September 11, supra. One of Mrs. Fremont's letters requested Lincoln's 
answer of September 11, supra, already sent by mail, the other specified that she 
had learned from Francis P Blair, Sr., of Francis E Blair, Jr.'s letter to Montgom- 
ery Blair September i, and requested a copy of it ". . . and any other communi- 
cations . . . which . . . have made the investigation necessary. . . .** 



To Joseph Holt 1 

Hon. Joseph Holt Executive Mansion Sep. 12. 1861 

Dear Sir Yours of this day, in relation to the late proclamation 
of Gen. Fremont, is received. Yesterday I addressed a letter to him 
by mail, on the same subject, and which is intended to be made 
public when he receives it. I herewith send you a copy of that let- 
ter, which, perhaps, shows my position as distinctly as any new 
one I could write. I will thank you to not make it public, until 
Gen. Fremont shall have had time to receive the original. Your 
Obt. Servt. A. 



* ADfS, DLC-RTL. Holt to Lincoln, September 12, 1861, ". . . The procla- 
mation ... of Genl. Fremont . . . transcends & ... violates the law. . . ." 
(Ibid.}. The copy of the letter which Lincoln enclosed to Holt was released on 
September 14 (New York Herald*), but Fremont still had not received the copy 
sent by mail. See Lincoln to Fremont, September 11, supra. 



To James W. Ripley 1 

September 12, 1861 

Mr. Weston says there is a vacancy of a Military Storekeeper in 
the Regular Army; and to which he wishes to be appointed. I 
know nothing of it; but if the head of the Department or Bureau, 
having the matter in charge, will be satisfied that his appointment 
is proper, I have no objection A. LINCOLN 

Sep. 12. 1861. 

1 ALS, OClWHi. Charles Weston was appointed military storekeeper at the 
Watertown, Connecticut, Arsenal, but was removed by General James W. Ripley, 
chief of ordnance, in September, 1862, on charges of neglect of duty and diso- 
bedience of orders preferred by Captain Thomas J. Rodman in command. See 
also Lincoln to George M. Weston, September 28, infra. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Sept. 13. 1861 

Charles Case, formerly M.C. from the district of Indiana now 
represented by Hon. Mr. Mitchell, has been, and. is working so 

[520] 



SEPTEMBER 13, l86l 

well for us in the matter of volunteering in Indiana, that Mr. 
Mitchell is very anxious for him to be offered a Pay-Mastership. I 
say offered, for Mr. Case has not himself asked for it. ... 

1 American Art Association Anderson Galleries Catalog 3955, March 4, 1932, 
No. 121. This incomplete text is all that is available. Representative William 
Mitchell was a lawyer of Kendallville, Indiana. Charles Case, a lawyer of Fort 
Wayne, was not nominated to the Senate as an additional paymaster until March 
28, 1864, and was confirmed April 20, 1864, after three years of service in the 
Indiana Volunteers as a commissioned officer ranking progressively from first 
lieutenant to colonel. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

If the appointment within requested can be made according to 
law, and the rules of the Dept. I shall be pleased for it to be done 
Sept. 13, 1861 A. 



1 Copy, DNA WB. RG 107, Secretary of War, Personnel Appointments, Box 12. 
The copy of Lincoln's endorsement is on the back of a copy of a War Department 
memorandum concerning the application of Sergeant Charles Hancock, "about 
thirty years of age" to become a second lieutenant in the Marine Corps. Hancock 
had all the necessary qualifications and recommendations, but according to law, 
". . . all applicants must be between the respective ages of 20 & not over 25 
years of age." There is no record of his appointment. 



To William H. Seward 1 

Sep. 13. 1861. 

To-day, Hon. W. E Thomasson 2 calls to say William Forrester, 
of Louisville, Ky, who was raised by Mrs. J. F. Speed, ought to be 
Sec. of Leg. to Chili. 

Is it Chili, that Judge Barton 3 goes to? and is there a Sec. of Leg. 
to Barton's mission? If so, I am willing, I am willing [sic'] that 
William Forrester, above named, shall have it. A Lirq-coLN 

1 ALS, NAuE. There is no record of William Forrester's appointment. 

2 William P. Thomasson, formerly congressman from Kentucky (1843-1847). 

3 The name appears to be "Barton," but Lincoln may have referred to Allen 
A, Burton of Kentucky, appointed minister to New Granada (Colombia). 



To Richard Yates 1 

[September 13, 1861] 

The bearer of this Victor B. Bell is an Illinoisan, and one of the 
cleverest and best business men in the State. He wishes to get a 

[521] 



SEPTEMBER 4, l86l 

position not lower than Captain in some volunteer Regiment; and 
I shall be greatly obliged if you can assist him in it. 

Please take some special interest in it. You never served a better 
man, or one who will more amply appreciate and justify what you 
may do for him. Yours Truly A. LINCOLN 

1 Copy, IHi-Yates Papers. The copy is contained in Bell to Yates, September 14, 
1861, in which. Bell says, "I hold a letter of introduction to you from Pres Lincoln, 
dated on yesterday of which [the] following is a copy. . . ." There is no record 
of Bell's appointment by Governor Yates. See also Lincoln to Cameron, August 22, 
supra, concerning Bell. 



To Edward Bates 1 

September 14, 1861 

If the Attorney General knows no objection, I know none, to Mr. 
Horatio R. Maryman's being a Justice of the Peace for this Dis- 
trict. A. LINCOLN 
Sep. 14. 1861. 

1 AES, CSmH. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from Benjamin B. 
French, commissioner of public buildings, to Edward C. Carrington, August 29, 
1861, recommending Horatio R. Maryman. Record of Maryman's appointment 
has not been found. 



To John W. Davis 1 

[September 15?] 1861 

The President has read this letter; and he deeply commisserates 
the condition of any one so distressed as the writer seems to be. He 
does not know Mr. Davis only knows him to be one of the ar- 
rested Police Commissioners of Baltimore because he says so in 
this letter. Assuming him to be one of those Commissioners, the 
President understands Mr. Davis could at the time of his arrest, 
could at any time since, and can now, be released by taking a full 
oath of allegiance to the Government of the United States; and 
that Mr. Davis has not been kept in ignorance of this condition of 
release. If Mr. Davis is still so hostile to the Government, and so 
determined to aid its' enemies in destroying it, he makes his own 
choice. 

1 AES copy, DLC-RTL. The copy of this endorsement was retained by Lincoln 
when he returned Davis' letter of September 11, on which the original endorse- 
ment was written. Davis acknowledged its receipt in a second letter written at Fort 
Lafayette, New York, September 20, 1861, ". . . if after an imprisonment of 
nearly three months, I were to procure my release by taking an oath in refer- 



SEPTEMBER 5, l86l 

ence to my future conduct, my compliance . . . might ... be construed into an 
admission . . . that something in my past . . . justified the . . . obliga- 
tion. . . ." (Ibid.}. 

Statement Concerning Arrests in Maryland 1 

[c. September 15, 1861] 

The public safety renders It necessary that the grounds of these 
arrests should at present be withheld, but at the proper time they 
will be made public. Of one thing the people of Maryland may rest 
assured: that no arrest has been made, or will be made, not based 
on substantial and unmistakable complicity with those in armed 
rebellion against the Government of the United States. In no case 
has an arrest been made on mere sxtspicion, or through personal 
or partisan animosities, but in all cases the Government is in pos- 
session of tangible and unmistakable evidence, which will, when 
made public, be satisfactory to every loyal citizen. 

1 Baltimore American, September 21, 1861. According to the American, Lin- 
coln's statement was made "in reply to an inquiry as to the cause of the arrest of 
Mayor Brown." Secessionist members of the Maryland legislature and certain 
other public officials, including Mayor George W. Brown of Baltimore, were 
arrested September 13-16. Many were released on oath or parole from time to 
time, the last being released November 27, 1862. (See OR, II, I, 563-748.) 



To Unidentified Persons 1 

[c. September 15, 1861?] 

Gentlemen: Yours of to-day, with the enclosure from Mr. 
Ridgely, has been received and referred to General Scott, as I 
know nothing whatever of the particular case. 

May I beg you to consider the difficulties of my position and 
solicit your kind assistance in it? Our security in the seizing of 
arms for our destruction will amount to nothing at all, if we are 
never to make mistakes in searching a place where there are none. 
I shall continue to do the very best I can to discriminate between 
true and false men. In the mean time, let me, once more, beg your 
assistance in allaying irritations which are unavoidable. Yours, 
very truly, A. LINCOLN. 

1 Hertz, II, 856. Hertz printed this letter without date or other reference. No 
trace of the original manuscript has been found, but the contents of the letter sug- 
gest that it may have been written at the time of the Baltimore arrests. The fact 
that Lincoln answers on the same date the incoming letter was written, suggests 
that his correspondents were not farther away than Baltimore. "Mr. Ridgely" may 
have been James L, Ridgely, whom Lincoln appointed collector of internal rev- 
enue at Baltimore in December, 1862. 

T523T 



To Robert Anderson 1 

Genl. R. Anderson [September 16, 1861] 

Louisville, Ky. from Washington 

From what you telegraph to-day, I think you better take actrve 
command in Kentucky at once. War Department will telegraph 
you about arms to-morrow. A. LUNTCOUNT 

1 ALS, owned by Weldon Petz, Detroit, Michigan; copy, DLC-RTL. The orig- 
inal coirununication is written on a U.S. Military Telegraph blank. Although 
the original is undated, the copy bears the date September 16, and with the copy 
there is the copy of Anderson's telegram received on the same date: "We have 
received positive information that the Tennesseans are invading Kentucky through 
the Cumberland Gap. We can get plenty of men if we can obtain arms for them. 
This is of vital importance. ROBT ANDERSON." 

To Simon Cameron 1 

If the facts are as within stated, of which I know not, I have no 
objection to the appointment as proposed. A. LINCOLN 

Sep. 16. 1861 

1 AES, DLC-RTL. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from General 
Joseph K. F. Mansfield to Cameron, September 12, 1861, recommending Lieuten- 
ant Colonel Samuel W. Owen of the **. . . ist. Kentucky Cavalry (so called). 
. . ." for promotion to colonel of that regiment. Below Lincoln's endorsement is 
the following: "Respectfully returned to the President who is informed that Le 
Prince Felix de Salm Salm has been appointed the Colonel of this Regiment. 
SIMON CAMERON, Secy of War." No further record of Prince Salm Salm's con- 
nection with the First Kentucky Cavalry has been found, but other sources 
indicate his service on General Louis Blenker's staff and as colonel of the Eighth 
New York Infantry (October 31, 1862 April 23, 1863) and of the Sixty-eighth 
New York Infantry (June 8, 1864 November 30, 1865). 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Respectfully submitted to the War Department, asking a fair 
consideration of this case. 

September 16, 1861 

1 The Flying Quill, February March, 1950, No. 57. According to the catalog 
description, Lincoln's endorsement is on a recommendation of George Stoneman 
for a brigadier generalship. Stoneman's appointment as brigadier ranking from 
August 13, 1861, was confirmed by the Senate on March 7, 1862. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

September 16, 1861. 

Secretary of War please send to General Scott a copy of your 
dispatch from General Fremont, showing the localities and num- 
ber of his forces. A. 



1 OR, I, III, 493. Lincoln's endorsement is on Fremont's dispatch of September 
15 listing a total of 55,693 men (ibid.). 

[524] 



To Simon Cameron 1 

I am willing to make Gen. Cadwallader, a Brigadier, or a Major 
General, any moment when Gen. Cameron says so. 

Sep 16. 1861 A. LINCOLN 

1 AES, DLC-Cameron Papers. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of 
a page containing copies of letters recommending appointment of George Cad- 
walader of Philadelphia as brigadier general. An endorsement by George B. Mc- 
Clellan of the same date reads in part, "I cannot recommend the appoint- 
ment. . . . If he be appointed ... I would respectfully request that he may not 
be assigned to duty . . . under my command. . . ." Cadwalader was not nom- 
inated to the Senate as major general until March 28, 1862, and was confirmed 
April 25. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

The Sec. or Asst. Sec. of War can exercise discretion in this case. 
Sep. 16. 1861. A LINCOLN 

1 AES, DLC-Cameron Papers. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of 
a letter from civil engineer Albert B. Cooley, Philadelphia, August 23, 1861, re- 
questing permission to communicate with his men employed in deepening the 
channel of the James River below Richmond, Virginia, under contract with that 
city at the outbreak of the war. A previous endorsement by Thomas A. Scott, Sep- 
tember 13, recommended Cooley's sending ". . . open letters to his men through 
Genl Wool Commanding at Fortress Monroe letters to be forwarded ... as op- 
portunity . . , may offer." 

To Winfield Scott 1 

Executive Mansion, 

Washington, D.C., 

Lieutenant-General Scott: September 16, 1861. 

My dear Sir: Since conversing with you I have concluded to 
request you to frame an order for recruiting North Carolinians at 
Fort Hatteras. I suggest it be so framed as for us to accept a small- 
er force even a company if we cannot get a regiment or more. 
"What is necessary to now say about officers, you will judge. Gov- 
ernor Seward says he has a nephew (Clarence A. Seward, I be- 
lieve) who would be willing to go and play colonel and assist in 
raising the force. Still, it is to be considered whether the North 
Carolinians will not prefer officers of their own, I should expect 
they would. Yours very truly, A. LmcoLisr. 

1 OR, I, IV, 613. AGO General Orders No. 79, September 17, 1861, authorized 
the acceptance of services of loyal North Carolinians, not to exceed one regiment, 
at Hatteras Inlet. Clarence A. Seward was lieutenant colonel of the Nineteenth 
New York Infantry May 22 September 28, 1861, but no other reference to his 
military service has been found. 

[525] 



To Caleb B. Smith 1 

Hon. Sec. of Interior Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir Sep. 16. 1861. 

Please please [szc] see the bearer, Dr. Lincoln, and hear him as 
to a Mr. Chesney. Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

3-ALS, owned by George Gould Lincoln, Washington, D.C. Dr. Nathan S. 
Lincoln of Washington sought the release of his friend James Chesney, a native 
of South Carolina who had been dismissed from his post as clerk in the Pension 
Office on August 30, 1861, and imprisoned because of an intercepted letter to his 
son in the Confederate Army. Chesney was released through the influence of 
his friends (Jeanie Gould Lincoln, "Out With Mosby's Men," Petersorts Maga- 
zine,, December, 1888, pp. 532-33)- 

To Gideon Welles 1 

Hon. Sec. of Navy Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir Sept. 16. 1861 

Judge Peters 2 says that Robert Mitchell, of Darlington District, 
South Carolina, wishes to enter the Naval [Academy], and that 
the M.C. of the District would have nominated him had it not been 
for secession. I do not know the young man; but if he be shown 
to be loyal, and qualified & suitable in other respects, I think you 
might appoint him. Yours truly A. LiiNrcoiJsr 

1 ALS-P, ISLA. There is no record of Robert Mitchell's appointment. 

2 John H. Peters. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

I personally know Mr. Parsons, & have no doubt he would make a 
good Paymaster, Qtr. Master, or Commissary. A. LINCOLN 

Sep. 17. 1861. 

1 AES, DNA WE. B.G 107, Secretary of War, Personnel Appointments, Box 4. 
Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of letters from Henry D. Bacon and 
Hiram Barney, September 6, 1861, recommending Lewis B. Parsons for an ap- 
pointment. Parsons was appointed captain and quartermaster of Volunteers, Oc- 
tober 31, 1861. 

To Winfield Scott 1 

September 17, 1861 

Will Lieut. Gen. Scott please consider, and inform me what can 
be, and ought to be done as a recognition of the gallantry of the 
officers who fought with Gen. Lyon at Wilson's creek? 
Sep. 17. 1861. A 

[526] 



SEPTBMBER 1 8, l86l 

i ALS, RPB. No reply from Scott has been located, tut a joint resolution of 
ongress, approved December 24, and printed in AGO General Orders No. ***, 
December 30, 1861, gave recognition to the late Brigadier General Nathaniel 
^yon and authorized each regiment engaged in the battle of Springfield, Missouri 
... to bear upon its colors the word 'Springfield* embroidered in letters of 
fold . . ." (OR, I, 111,93). 

To William H. Seward 1 

Respectfully submitted to the State Department, with the inquiry 
'Has Edwards yet gone to Demarara? A LINCOLN 

Sep. 17. 1861. 

1 AES, DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 358. Lincoln's endorsement is writ- 
en on the back of a testimonial of John L Pfau, September 16, 1861, as to the 
lisloyalty of Reverend Charles A. Page of Newport, Kentucky. Below Lincoln's 
indorsement is Seward's reply, "No He has not gone and I advise that his com- 
nission be revoked. WHS." The only apparent connection between the cases of 
3 age and Theodore D. Edwards, appointed consul at Demerara, British Guiana, 
s that both were Kentuckians accused of disloyalty. The U.S. Official Register 
ists Edwards as consul, as of September 30, 1861, but in 1863 the consulship at 
Demerara is vacant. See Lincoln to Seward, August 6, supra. 

To Lorenzo Thomas 1 

September 17, 1861 

Gen. McClernand, has shown great energy, and industry. He sat 
in Congress to the end of the session; and since then has effected 
certainly as much as any other Brig: Genl. in organizing forces. 
He is now in full command at Cairo, & without an aid. Please let 
him have the one he asks for within. A. LusrcoL.iN' 

Sep. 17. 1861. 

1 AES, owned by R. E. Burdick, New York City. Lincoln's endorsement is 
written on the back of McClernand's letter of September 11, 1861, explaining 
more fully than his telegram of the same date (see Lincoln to Cameron, Sep- 
tember 11, supra} his need as commanding officer at Cairo, Illinois, for a staff 
officer and asking again for the assignment of First Lieutenant James H. Wilson: 
". . . all this work I have done without a staff without an adjutant, and even 
without an aid, for the commission of Capt. Bielaski has been revoked." A lengthy 
endorsement by Lieutenant Colonel Hartman Bache, Bureau of Topographical 
Engineers, September 18, explained that Lieutenant Wilson had been assigned to 
recruiting a company of enlisted men and that other generals (Dix, Anderson, 
and Samuel R. Curtis) were ahead of McClernand with requests for a staff 
officer from the Bureau. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion Sept. 18. 1861 

My dear Sir: To guard against misunderstanding I think fit to 
say that the joint expedition of the Army and Navy agreed upon 

[527] 



SEPTEMBER 1 8-> l86l 

some time since, and in which Gen. T. W. Sherman was and is to 
bear a conspicuous part, is in no wise to be abandoned, but must 
be ready to move by the first of, or very early in, October. Let all 
preparations go forward accordingly. Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, owned by Edward C. Stone, Boston, Massachusetts. Brigadier General 
Thomas W. Sherman commanded the Army units of the expedition which left 
Hampton Roads, Virginia, October 29, and occupied Port Royal, South Carolina, 
November 7, 1861. See the same letter to Welles, infra. 



To William H. Seward 1 

Hon. Sec. of State Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir Sep. 18. 1861 

Mr. Williams wants a Consulship. If you can find one he is will- 
ing to take, I have no objection. Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 404. William R. Williams is not 
listed as consul either in 1861 or 1863 in the U.S. Official Register. 



To Gideon Welles 1 

Hon. Sec. of Navy. Executive Mansion Sept. 18, 1861 

My dear Sir To guard against misunderstanding I think fit 
to say that the joint expedition of the Army and Navy, agreed 
upon some time since., and in which Gen. T. W. Sherman was, and 
is to bear a conspicuous part, is in nowise to be abandoned, but 
must be ready to move by the first of, or very early in October. 
Let all preparations go forward accordingly. Yours truly 

A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, DNA WR NB RG 45, Executive Letters, No. 129. See the same letter to 
Cameron and note, supra. 



To William S. Wood 1 

If the items of this bill are correct, in all respects, let it be paid 
out of fund for furnishing Presidential Mansion. 

Sep. 18. 1861. A. LINCOLN 

1 AES, DNA RG 217, General Accounting Office. Lincoln's endorsement is on 
the back of a bill rendered by John Alexander to the commissioner of Public 
Buildings in the amount of $335.50 for materials and labor in erecting a large 
tent on the "Presidents Grounds . . . June 27, July 3, 6, 10, 13, 17, 20, 1861." 
Commissioner Wood endorsed "I certify the above to be correct. W. S. "Wood." 

[528] 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Sec. of War, please see the bearer Mrs. Warren. 
Sep. 19. 1861 A. 

1 ALS, RPB. Mrs. Warren has not been identified. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

September 19, 1861 

Let Staff officers be appointed for Gen. Paine, as within requested. 
Gen: Camron perceives that our friend Leonard Swett is one of 
them. A. LINCOLN 

Sep. 19. 1861. 

1 AES, IHi. Lincoln's endorsement appears on a letter of Brigadier Gen- 
eral Eleazar A. Paine to Lorenzo Thomas, Paducah, Kentucky, September 12, 
1861, asking the following appointments to his staff: 

"Leonard Swett, Asst. Adjt. Genl. Richard E. Davis Brigade Commissary 
Algernon S Baxter Brigade Qr. Master Ephraim Gilmore Aid, Captain Phelps 
Paine aid, ist Lieut.'* 

Swett was appointed on November 16, but the appointment was cancelled. 
Davis and Baxter were appointed on November 23. No record of the appoint- 
ment of Gilmore has been found. Phelps Paine was appointed lieutenant and 
assistant adjutant general of Volunteers as of October 23, 1861. 

To Winfield Scott 1 

September 19, 1861 

These papers have been handed me by James Baker, the father. If 
the boy be under eighteen is he entitled to a discharge? And if so, 
how is the fact as to age, to be ascertained? A. LINCOLN 

Sep. 19. 1861. 

1 AES, DLC-RTL-. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of a deposition 
by James Baker, September 17, 1861, requesting a discharge for his only son Al- 
mon Baker, a minor, who had enlisted without his father's consent, and -was at 
the time a member of Company G, Second Michigan Infantry. Scott's endorse- 
ment written immediately below Lincoln's cites an act of congress, September 28, 
1850, under which the boy should be discharged ". . . upon evidence being pro- 
duced satisfactory to the Secretary that the recruit was a minor. . . .** 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: Sep. 20. 1861 

There are pressing demands for arms both at St. Louis and at 
Louisville; while I do not know that any can be spared for either 
place. If, however, with your better knowledge of the facts, you 

[529] 



SEPTEMBER 2O, l86l 

can spare any for St. Louis, to the extent of four or five thousand 
let them be shipped to the order of Gov. Gamble. Yours truly 

A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, DLC-Cameron Papers. Governor Gamble telegraphed Edward Bates, 
September 17, "For God's sake get me arms for infantry & cavalry"; and Joshua 
F. Speed telegraphed twice on September 17: ". . . Men plenty but no 
arms. . . ."; ". . . Our men cannot go into camp -without arms, as they can at 
the North; as we have enemies at home. . . ." (DLC-RTL). 

To Simon Cameron 1 

And I sent, this morning, an order for Todd's appointment, on the 
back of Gen. McClellan's letter recommending three others. 
Sep. 20. 1861. A. LINCOLN 

1 AES, DLC-Cameron Papers. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of 
a note from Cameron, "Genl. Thomas has called to say he recommends the 
apptment of Mr. Todd as a Brigade General." Lincoln's endorsement on McClel- 
lan's letter has not been located, but John B. S. Todd was appointed brigadier 
general of Volunteers September 19, 1861. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

If there be a vacancy, let Charles Weston be appointed a Military 
Store-Keeper, as indicated within by Gen. Ripley. 

Sep. 20. 1861 A. LINCOLN 

1 AES, IHi. Lincoln's endorsement appears on a letter from Brigadier 
General James W. Ripley, September 19, 1861, recommending Charles Weston 
of Maine for appointment as military storekeeper in the Ordnance Department. 
See Lincoln to Ripley, September 12, 1861, supra. 

Memorandum : 
Appointment of Henry D. Wallen, Jr. 1 

[c. September 21, 1861] 
West-Point. 
I wish this case to be specially attended to. A. LINCOLN 

1 AES, DNA WR RG 94, U.S. Military Academy, 1861, No. 908, Box 80. Lin- 
coln's endorsement is written on a letter from Cameron to Mrs. Laura L. Wallen, 
New York City, September 21, 1861, promising an appointment for her son 
"... in January or February next. . . ." See Lincoln to Joseph G. Totten, Janu- 
ary 18, 1862, infra. 

To William H. Seward 1 

[c. September 21, 1861] 

Mr. Miller, the old gentleman concerning whom Maj. Ramsay 
writes the within letter, is employed, and for a long time has been, 

[530] 



SEPTEMBER 2 2 5 l86l 

at the Arsenal. He is now implicated for disloyalty by some evi- 
dence before the Congressional Investigating Committee now in 
session in this City, and is in danger of discharge. I have seen him, 
and believe him to be loyal. Please see him, and talk with him; and 
if he makes the same impression "upon you, administer the Oath 
of Allegiance to him, & give him a request to the War Department 
that he be allowed to retain his place. A. LirccoLiNr. 

Hon. Sec. of State. 

1 Hertz, II, 881 (n.d.). George D. Ramsay wrote to Representative John F. 
Potter, December 11, 1861, in reply to a query concerning what disposition had 
been made of employees listed by the committee on loyalty of government em- 
ployees, "Mr. [Isaac S.] Miller was reinstated on the 2st September, at the 
request of the honorable Secretary of State, and with the approbation and . . . 
direction of the . . . Secretary of War." (Thirty-seventh Congress, Second 
Session, House of Representatives Report No. x6> p. 8). 



To Orville H. Browning 1 

Private <& confidential. 

Hon. O. H. Browning Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir Washington Sept 22d 1861. 

Yours of the i/th is just received; and coming from you, I con- 
fess it astonishes me. That you should object to my adhering to a 
law, which you had assisted in making, and presenting to me, less 
than a month before, is odd enough. But this is a very small part. 
Genl. Fremont's proclamation, as to confiscation of property, and 
the liberation of slaves, is purely political., and not within the 
range of military law, or necessity. If a commanding General finds 
a necessity to seize the farm of a private owner, for a pasture, an 
encampment, or a fortification, he has the right to do so, and to 
so hold it, as long as the necessity lasts; and this is within military 
law, because within military necessity. But to say the farm shall 
no longer belong to the owner, or his heirs forever; and this as 
well when the farm is not needed for military purposes as 'when 
it is, is purely political, without the savor of military law about it. 
And the same is true of slaves. If the General needs them, he can 
seize them, and use them; but when the need is past, it is not for 
him to fix their permanent future condition. That must be settled 
according to laws made by law-makers, and not by military proc- 
lamations. The proclamation in the point in question, is simply 
"dictatorship." It assumes that the general may do anything he 
pleases confiscate the lands and free the slaves of loyal people, 
as well as of disloyal ones. And going the whole figure I have no 

[531] 



SEPTEMBER 22, l86l 

doubt would be more popular with some thoughtless people, than 
that which has been done! But I cannot assume this reckless posi- 
tion; nor allow others to assume it on my responsibility. You speak 
of it as being the only means of saving the government. On the 
contrary it is itself the surrender of the government. Can it be 
pretended that it is any longer the government of the U.S. any 
government of Constitution and laws, wherein a General, or a 
President, may make permanent rules of property by proclama- 
tion? 

I do not say Congress might not with propriety pass a law, on 
the point, just such as General Fremont proclaimed. I do not say I 
might not, as a member of Congress, vote for it. What I object to, 
is, that I as President, shall expressly or impliedly seize and ex- 
ercise the permanent legislative functions of the government. 

So much as to principle. Now as to policy. No doubt the thing 
was popular in some quarters, and would have been more so if it 
had been a general declaration of emancipation. The Kentucky 
Legislature would not budge till that proclamation was modified; 
and Gen. Anderson telegraphed me that on the news of Gen. Fre- 
mont having actually issued deeds of manumission, a whole com- 
pany of our Volunteers threw down their arms and disbanded. I 
was so assured, as to think it probable, that the very arms we had 
furnished Kentucky would be turned against us. I think to lose 
Kentucky is nearly the same as to lose the whole game. Kentucky 
gone, we can not hold Missouri, nor, as I think, Maryland. These 
all against us, and the job on our hands is too large for us. We 
would as well consent to separation at once, including the surren- 
der of this capitol. On the contrary, if you will give up your rest- 
lessness for new positions, and back me manfully on the grounds 
upon which you and other kind friends gave me the election, and 
have approved in my public documents, we shall go through tri- 
umphantly. 

You must not understand I took my course on the proclamation 
because of Kentucky. I took the same ground in a private letter to 
General Fremont before I heard from Kentucky. 

You think I am inconsistent because I did not also forbid Gen. 
Fremont to shoot men under the proclamation. I understand that 
part to be within military law; but I also think, and so privately 
wrote Gen. Fremont, that it is impolitic in this, that our adver- 
saries have the power, and will certainly exercise it, to shoot as 
many of our men as we shoot of theirs. I did not say this in the 
public letter, because it is a subject I prefer not to discuss in the 
hearing of our enemies. 

[532] 



SEPTEMBER 22, l86l 

There has been no thought of removing Gen. Fremont on any 
ground connected with his proclamation; and if there has been 
any wish for his removal on any ground, oior mutual friend Sam. 
Glover can probably tell you what it was. I hope no real necessity 
for it exists on any ground. 

Suppose you write to Hurlbut and get him to resign. 2 Your 
friend as ever A. LINCOLN 

1 LS, IHi; ADfS and LS copy, DLC-RTL. The letter which is in the Illinois 
State Historical Library is the one received by Browning. It bears further minor 
emendations in Lincoln's handwriting and provides the final text as reproduced 
here. Browning to Lincoln, September 17, 1861, is in the Lincoln Papers, but 
scarcely requires summary in view of Lincoln's explicit references. 

2 Browning's reply of September 30 is sixteen pages in length and contains an 
insert in regard to Lincoln's cryptic suggestion concerning Stephen A. Hurlbut 
as follows: "I could not tell, for the life of me, whether you were serious, or 
whether you was poking a httle irony at me. If I thought you were in earnest I 
would certainly do it, as I could with great propriety, having in my possession 
his written pledge to resign if he drank a drop of liquor after going into the serv- 
ice He has violated his pledge, and behaved badly, and ought to resign." (DLC- 
RTL) . Hurlbut did not resign, of course, but served with distinction throughout 
the war. One of the charges preferred against General Fremont, however, was 
that he had permitted Hurlbut to ". . . remain in command of the forces ... in 
Northern Missouri from the tenth-day of August ... to about the tenth-day 
of September . . . , knowing him . . . to be a common drunkard and unfit all 
of said time to command. . . .*' (Charges preferred by Francis P Blair, Jr., 
against John C. Fremont, October 2, enclosed in Blair to Lincoln, October 3, 
1861 (DLC-RTL). 



To John C. Fremont 1 

Washington, September 22, 1861. 

Governor Morton telegraphs as follows: Colonel Lane [Love], 2 
just arrived by special train, represents Owensboro, 40 miles above 
Evansville, in possession of secessionists. Green river is navigable. 
Owensboro, must be seized. We -want a gunboat sent up from Pa- 
ducah for that purpose. Send up the gunboat if, in your discretion, 
you think it right. Perhaps you had better order those in charge 
of the Ohio river to guard it vigilantly at all points. 

Major General Fremont. A. LirrooLi*. 

1 Thirty-seventh Congress, Third Session, Senate Reports,, No. 108, Report of 
the Joint Committee on the Conduct of the War, Part III, pp. 148-49; also in Offi- 
cial Records, I, IV, 265. Fremont telegraphed Lincoln the same day, "I have im- 
mediately ordered Captain [Andrew H.] Foote with gunboat to ... Owens- 
borough, and will take measures to guard the Ohio.** (OR, I, IV, 265). 

2 Both sources are in error in naming "Colonel Lane." Morton's telegram 
(DLC-RTL) reads "Love" instead of "Lane," and undoubtedly refers to Lieuten- 
ant Colonel S. Palace Love of the Eleventh Kentucky Infantry, which was organ- 
ized from Green River counties in Kentucky and was encamped at Owensboro. 

[533] 



To Oliver P. Morton 1 

To Gov O P Morton Sept 22d 1861. 

By Telegraph from Washington 1861 

Have just ordered Gen Fremont to send up gun Boat if he can 

spare it A LINCOLN 

1 Copy, In. The copy received by Morton is written on a Western Union Tele- 
graph Company blank. 

To Montgomery C. Meigs 1 

September 23, 1861 

The within recommendations of James H. McKay are excellent 
and most ample and proper and he should be appointed if there 
be any vacancy A. LINCOLN 

Sept 23. 1861 

1 AES, owned by Mary L. Callwell, San Francisco, California. Lincoln's en- 
dorsement is written on an envelope. The papers referred to are no longer with 
the endorsement. James H. McKay of Illinois was nominated to the Senate as 
captain and assistant quartermaster of Volunteers, April 7, and confirmed April 
14, 1862. 

Endorsement : 

Release of Imprisoned Secessionists 1 

[c. September 24, 1861] 

Were sent to Fort Lafayette by the military authorities of Ken- 
tucky and it would be improper for me to intervene without fur- 
ther knowledge of the facts than I now possess. A. LINCOLN. 

1 OR, II, II, 808. Lincoln's endorsement is on a communication from George D. 
Prentice, September 24, 1861, asking release of ex-Governor Charles S. More- 
head, Reuben T. Durrett, and M. W. Barr, arrested in Louisville, Kentucky. See 
also Lincoln to Seward, October 4, infra. 

Memorandum About Guns 1 

Executive Mansion, Washington, Sep. 24. 1861. 
If twenty guns, and a carriage and appointments to each, shall 
be made equal, or superior to the Ellsworth gun & carriage, exhib- 
ited some time since to Capt. Kingsbury, 2 and more recently to 
me, the quality to be judged of by Capt. Kingsbury; and shall be 
delivered to the Government of the U.S. at this city, within sixty 
days from this date, I will advise that they be paid for at the price 
of three hundred and fifty dollars for each gun, with its' carriage 

[534] 



SEPTEMBER 25, l86l 

and appointments and in addition will advise that reasonable 
charges for transportation from Worcester, in Massachusetts to 
this city, be paid. Will also advise that forty cents per pound be 
paid for all good amunition, suitable for said guns which shall be 
furnished with said guns, provided the amount does not exceed 
two hundred rounds to each gun. A. 



1 ADS, DLC-RTL. Eli Thayer, ex-representative from Massachusetts (1857- 
1861), "wrote Lincoln on September 21, 1861, suggesting in the interest of in- 
creased efficiency of Union troops, "The formation of Light Artillery Brigades. 
. . . The cannon to be drawn by the soldiers. . . . The cannon best adapted 
to this service is the one called the *Ellsworth Gun,' from his [Elmer E. Ells- 
worth] having first ordered such for the use of his Zouave regiment." (DLC- 
RTL). 

2 On November 30, 1861, Captain Charles P. Kingsbury of the Ordnance De- 
partment certified the receipt and performance of the cannon presented by 
Thayer (DLC-RTL). 

To Lorenzo Thomas 1 

Adjt. General, please answer this, or have it answered. 
Sep. 24, 1861 A. LINCOLN 

1 AES, DLC-RTL. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a telegram from Colonel 
John B. Turchin, Camp Dennison, Ohio, September 23, explaining that his regi- 
ment, the Nineteenth Illinois, had ". . . one hundred & fifty (150) men disabled 
by rail road accident about one hundred ( 100) men sick. . . . Our uniforms shirts 
& shoes worn out. The men not paid for two (2) months. Our equipments are 
sent ... to Washington. The Regt is ordered to Louisville. . . . which way 
shall we go. . . .** Below Lincoln's endorsement is an endorsement by Absalom 
Baird, A.G.O., that a telegram had been sent to Turchin "to obey the orders of 
his General." 

To Simon Cameron 1 

The within recommendations of Mr. Millard are ample; and I 
shall be gratified if a place can be found for him. 

Sep. 25. 1861 A. LINCOLN 

Please see Mr. Millard A.L. 

1 AES, IHi. Lincoln's endorsements are written on an envelope which Lincoln 
addressed "Hon. Sec. of War." The papers referred to are no longer with the 
envelope, and "Mr. Millard" has not been identified. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Sec. of War, please see Mr. Denny, of Mass. 
Sep. 25. 1861. A. LINCOLN 

l ALS-P, ISLA. Lincoln's note is written on a small card. Denny may have 
been Christopher C. Denny, clothing manufacturer of Leicester, Massachusetts. 

[535] 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Hon. Sec. of War Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: Sep. 25. 1861 

I am called upon for aid to Colorado Territory. Please see the 
Messenger of Gov. Gilpin, and his despatches, and with the assist- 
ance of Genl. Scott, provide as well for that territory, as a con- 
sideration of the whole public service will admit. Yours truly 

A. 



1 ALS, IHL The accompanying envelope is endorsed by Lincoln "Please see 
the bearer, Messenger from Gov. Gilpin/ AX." Governor William Gilpin had 
sent a letter to Cameron by messenger Benjamin R. Pegram, dated August 26, 
1861, asking ". . . essential supplies . . . 10,000 muskets, rifles, and equip- 
ments. . . ," (OR, I, III, 496). 

To Winfield Scott 1 

Lieut. Genl. Scott Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir Sep. 25. 1861 

Tlie bearer of this Mr. Pancoast represents that he resides in 
Hampshire County, Va. on the Maryland border, in an isolated 
neighborhood of Union people, who are suffering for salt. He 
wants permission to take a limited supply for that neighborhood 
from Hagerstown through our lines. He says the nature of the 
country does not admit of the article being carried from where 
he will take it to any secession region. 

I know not whether his request is admissable; but thinking you 
will better understand the matter than I, I send him to you. Very 
truly A. LiisrcoLiNr 

1 ALS-P, ISLA. Samuel A. Pancoast was given approval for his project and 
also secured the approval of Virginia authorities, but upon charges of specula- 
tion was arrested and imprisoned at Richmond in November, 1861 (OR, II, II, 
1530-45). 

To William EL Seward 1 

September 125, 1861 

Mr. Clark thinks the Consulship at Tahiti is vacant; and if the 
Secretary of State knows no objection, I know none, to Mr. Clark's 
having the appointment. A. LiisrcoLisr 

Sep. 25. 1861 

1 AES, NAuE. Lincoln's endorsement appears on a letter from A. H. Clark, 
Washington, September 25, 1861: 

"In March last I was recommended for the Consulship of Acapulco. 

[536] 



SEPTEMBER 26, l86l 

"Of the number of those who recommended me are gentlemen now hold- 
ing important federal positions in California and elsewhere. I am fully en- 
dorsed in the State Department by Senators Harlan, McDougall and Latham. 

"My application for Acapulco was unsuccessful, and I respectfully ask the 
Consulship for Tahiti, made vacant by the death of Mr [Visesimus] Turner 
who was appointed from California." 

No record of Clark's appointment has been found. 

To Caleb B. Smith 1 

September 25, 1861 

Has Dr. Stephenson, Congressional Librarian, resigned? Is there 
any vacancy of Assistant Congressional Librarian? .... 

1 Metropolitan Art Association Catalog, April i, 1914, No. 563. This incom- 
plete text is all that is available. John G. Stephenson had not i esigned, apparent- 
ly, for he was still librarian in 1863. There may have been a vacancy as assist- 
ant librarian, however, for assistant librarian L. L. Tilden was replaced by 
George A. Morris of Ohio in the U.S. Official Register for 1863. 

Appointment of William L. Hodge 1 

Executive Mansion September 26, 1861. 

I hereby appoint William L. Hodge Acting Secretary of the Treas- 
ury during the absence of the Secretary commencing on Friday, 
the 2/th inst. ABRAHAM: 



1 DS, owned by Foreman M. Lebold, Chicago, Illinois. Both Secretary Chase 
and Assistant Secretary George Harrington being absent from Washington, Lin- 
coln appointed Hodge, who had been assistant secretary during the Fill more ad- 
ministration, but who had no federal office in 1861. 

To Oliver E Morton 1 

To O P Morton Sept 26 1861 

By Telegraph from Washington 1861 

"We are supplying all the demands for arms as fast as we can 
we expect to order a lot to you tomorrow I think there is no 
concentration of Railroads at Muldroughs Hill a week ago we 
heard that the enemy was encamped on Muldroughs hill now 
our friends are encamped upon it & the enemies pickets are in 
sight that is an improvement A. LusrcoLisr 

1 Copy, In. The copy received by Governor Morton is written on a Western 
Union blank, without punctuation. Morton's telegram to Thomas A. Scott, Sep- 
tember 25, 1861, advised that ". . . The recruiting business in Indiana will stop 
if guns are not furnished. . . . My state has done well. Has stripped herself of 
arms for the Government and the war is now upon her borders. ... I wish this 
shown to the President." (DLC-RTL) . Morton to Lincoln, September 26, reported 

[537] 



SEPTEMBER 27, 1 8 6 1 

the enemy's pickets "... in sight of Muldraugh's Hill about forty (40) miles 
from Louisville, from that point they can communicate by rail with every seceded 
state but Texas & Arkansas. . . ." (Ibid.}. 

To Samuel T. Glover 1 

Sent from "Washington [September 27, 1861?] 
To Samuel T. Glover, Esq St. Louis, Mo. 

What news from up river? Lexington, Booneville, or Jefferson 
City? Please answer. A. LirsrcoLrc 

* ALS, owned by Henry R. Benjamin, New York City. The date of this tele- 
gram is derived from Glover's telegram in reply, received at 12:45 A.M , Sep- 
tember 28, 1861. The time of dispatch recorded on Lincoln's telegram by the 
operator Is "5.15 PM." Glover's reply is as follows: "We have dispatch that 
[James H.] Lane has captured at Osceola large supply train of Raines [James S. 
Rains, Missouri State Guard, Confederate] & [Sterling] Price <& one hundred 
thousand dollars in money No other news" (DLC-RTL). 

Following the action at Boonville, Missouri, on September 13, Lexington, 
Missouri, was besieged until September 20, when it surrendered to Confederate 
forces. 

To Montgomery C. Meigs 1 

Q. M. Genl. 

Please do the proper thing as to the -within. 
Sep. 27. 1861 A. LINCOLN 

1 AES, DLC-RTL. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a telegram from Wil- 
liam Thomas, secretary of the Illinois department of army auditors, Springfield, 
Illinois, September 25, 1861, "We hear nothing from Washington. Mulligan's 
brigade is on our hands and no money to purchase a ration. We have sent over 
fifty thousand (50,000) men . . . without a Quarter Master. . . ." (DLC- 
RTL). Colonel James A. Mulligan of the Twenty-third Illinois Infantry was 
offered, but declined, appointment as brigadier general. Meigs* endorsement in 
reply to Lincoln's is as follows: "Capt. [Asher R.] Eddy a regular quarter master 
is ordered to Springfield to assist the Governor." 



To William H. Seward 1 

September 27, 1861 

I am entirely willing that Mr, Slade shall be appointed to any 
consulship not already disposed of, except the single one which 
the Sec. of State understands without my now mentioning. 
Sep. 27. 1861. A. LIN-COUNT 

1 AES, NAuE. Lincoln's endorsement is on a letter from Edward Bates to 
Lincoln, September 23, 1861, asking a consulship for William Slade of Cleve- 
land, Ohio. Slade was nominated to the Senate for the consulship at Nice, 
March 21, and confirmed March 31, 1862. 

[538] 



To James G. Bennett 1 

Private & confidential. 

Mr. James Gorden Bennett Washington, D.C. 

My dear Sir Sept. 28. 1861 

Last evening Mr. Wickoff solicited me for a pass, or permission 
to a gentleman whose name I forget, to accompany one of our 
vessels down the Potomac to-day, as a reporter of the Herald, say- 
ing the Sec. of the Navy had refused, while he had given the priv- 
ilege to reporters of other papers. It was too late at night for me 
to see the Secretary, and I had to decline giving the permission, 
because he the Sec, might have a sufficient reason unknown to me. 
I write this to assure you that the administration will not discrim- 
inate against the Herald, especially while it sustains us so gener- 
ously, and the cause of the country so ably as it has been doing. 
Your Obt. Servt. A. 



1 ALS-F, Grand Rapids, Michigan, Press, February 12, 1927. This letter is 
misdated September 22, 1861, in Hertz, II, 842. Bennett replied October 22, 1861, 
regretting that "Mr. Wikoff gave you any trouble. , . . Before that application 
by Mr. W, but unknown to him the Secretary of the Navy had very kindly 
facilitated [?] another of my correspondents all that was required. . . ." (DLC- 
RTL). Henry Wikoff, author, adventurer, and sometime British agent was cor- 
respondent for the New York Herald. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

September 28, 1861 

To-day, Sep. 28, 1861, Hon. Messrs. Dunn, Mitchell and Porter, 
and John D. Defrees, Mr. Donnohue, Fletcher, and Jones, all of 
Indiana, call and ask that Thomas A. Morris of that state be a Ma- 
jor General of Volunteers, and they say such is the wish of the 
entire Indiana Delegation in Congress. 

i AES, IHi. William M. Dunn, William Mitchell, and Albert G. Porter were 
U.S. representatives, and John D. Defrees was superintendent of public printing:. 
The other men named were probably- D. C. Donnohue of Greencastle, Calvin 
Fletcher of Indianapolis, and Aquilla Jones of Greencastle. Thomas A. Morris 
received no federal appointment as major general, but his biographical sketch 
in Appletons 9 Cyclopaedia says he was offered and declined the appointment 

To Simon Cameron 1 

September 28, 1861 
I think the case is sufficiently made for Genl Wade to be ap- 

pointed. 

1 American Art Association Anderson Galleries Catalog 3913, May 6, 1931, No. 

45. According to the catalog description, Lincoln's endorsement is written on the 

back of a letter from Melancthon S. Wade of Cincinnati, who was appointed briga- 

dier general of Volunteers, October i, 1861. 

[539] 



To William BL Seward 1 

The writer of the letter of which this is a copy, is one of the best 
men I know. A. LINCOLN 

Sep. 28. 1861 

1 AES, DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 241. Lincoln's endorsement is on 
the back of a copy of a letter from Lincoln's old friend James N. Brown, written 
from Springfield, Illinois, September 21, 1861, recommending Thomas Brown, 
editor of the Ohio Farmer at Cleveland, for a consulship. Thomas Brown is not 
listed as consul either in 1861 or 1863. 

To William EL Seward 1 

Hon. Sec. of State Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir Sep. 28. 1861 

I do not believe the duty is appropriately yours, but I will thank 
you if you will have this Indian treaty & amendments put in 
shape for publication, and also a draft of a proclamation in regard 
to it prepared. The accompanying notes of the Comr. of Indian 
Affairs, and of Mr. Usher, Atty for the indians, show, I think, that 
all is satisfactory now Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

i ALS, DNA FS RG 11, General Records of the U.S. Government, No. 317, 
Treaty 'with the Delawares at Leavenworth City, Kansas, July 2, 1861. The treaty 
proclamation was signed by Lincoln October 4, 1861. 

To George M. Weston 1 

Geo. M. Weston, Esq Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: Sep. 28. 1861 

Some time ago I told your brother if he would Get Gen. Ripley 
to say he desired his (your brother's) appointment as Military 
Store keeper, I would be inclined to appoint him. He brought me 
a note from Gen. Ripley saying he was competent, but in which he 
did not say he wished his appointment, and seemed to think he had 
got what I suggested. I, however, wrote the Sec. of War, favorable 
to his appointment. This morning your brother came to me again, 
having found in the newspapers that somebody else [had been ap- 
pointed] to the office, and insisted that there is still another place. 
I -went to Gen. Ripley, who told me plainly, he did not ask for his 
appointment, and could not be induced to ask for it. I have got the 
Sec. of War to promise to try to fix a place for him. Yours truly 

A. 



i ALS, owned by Mrs. William F. "Whiting, Holyoke, Massachusetts. See Lin- 
coln to James W. Ripley, September 12, supra., in regard to appointment for 
Charles Weston. George M. Weston was a lawyer and newspaperman of Augusta, 
Maine. 

[540] 



To Oliver E Morton 1 

To Gov O P Morton Sept 29 1861 

By Telegraph from Washington 1861 

I have just shown your message to Gen Scott He says he 
will be glad if the Report of Zollicoffers having left Cumberland 
Gap shall be confirmed I intend writing you today Arms 
going to you and Anderson as fast as we can send them 

A LINCOLN 

1 Copy, In The copy received by Governor Morton is written on a "Western 
Union blank, without punctuation. Governor Morton's message concerning Con- 
federate Brigadier General Felix K. Zollicoffer's movements has not been located. 

To Oliver E Morton 1 

Washington, D.C. Sep. 29, 1861 

His Excellency Gov. O. E Morton: Your letter by the hand of 
Mr. Prunk 2 was received yesterday. I write this letter because I 
wish you to believe of us (as we certainly believe of you) that we 
are doing the very best we can. You do not receive arms from us as 
fast as you need them; but it is because we have not near enough 
to meet all the pressing demands; and we are obliged to share 
around what we have, sending the larger share to the points which 
appear to need them most. We have great hope that our own sup- 
ply will be ample before long, so that you and all others can have 
as many as you need. I see an article in an Indianapolis news- 
paper denouncing me for not answering your letter sent by a spe- 
cial messenger two or three weeks ago. I did make what I thought 
the best answer I could to that letter. As I remember, it asked for 
ten heavy guns to be distributed, with some troops, at Lawrence- 
burgh, Madison, New- Albany and Evans ville; and I ordered the 
guns, and directed you to send the troops if you had them. 

As to Kentucky, you do not estimate that state as more impor- 
tant than I do; but I am compelled to watch all points. While I 
write this I am, if not in range., at least in hearing of cannon-shot, 
from an army of enemies more than a hundred thousand strong. I 
do not expect them to capture this city; but I knoiv they would, if 
I were to send the men and arms from here, to defend Louisville, 
of which there is not a single hostile armed soldier within forty 
miles, nor any force known to be moving upon it from any dis- 
tance. 

It is true, the Army in our front may make a half circle around 
Southward, and move on Louisville; but when they do, we will 
make a half circle around Northward, and meet them; and in 

[541] 



SEPTEMBER 3 O-, l86l 

the mean time we will get up what forces we can from other 
sources to also meet them. 

I hope Zollicoffer has left Cumberland Gap (though I fear he 
has not) because, if he has, I rather infer he did it because of his 
dred of Camp Dick Robinson, re~inforced from Cincinnati, mov- 
ing on him, than because of his intention to move on Louis- 
ville. 3 But if he does go round and re-inforce Buckner, let Dick 
Robinson come round and re-inforce Sherman, and the thing is 
substantially as it was when Zollicoffer left Cumberland Gap. I 
state this as an illustration; for in fact, I think if the Gap is left 
open to us Dick Robinson should take it and hold it; while Indiana, 
and the vicinity of Louisville in Kentucky, can re-inforce Sherman 
faster than Zollicoffer can Buckner. 

You requested that Lt. Col. Wood, 4 of the Army, should be ap- 
pointed a Brigadier General I will only say that very formi- 
dable objection has been made to this from Indiana. Yours very 
truly A. LirNTCOLisr 

* ADfS, DLC-RTL; LS, CSmH. Governor Morton telegraphed Lincoln Sep- 
tember 26, 1861, in reply to Lincoln's telegram of the same date (supra) , "It is 
true there is no concentration of rail roads at Mull Droughs Hill but the road 
running thence south connections with rail roads running to nearly every con- 
federate state. From, the spirit of your despatch & from other information I am 
satisfied my despatches in regard to Kentucky are not highly honored. ..." 
(DLC-RTL). 

2 Morton's letter introduced Dr. Daniel EL Prunk of Indianapolis **. . . bearer 
of despatches from me. ..." a surgeon in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Indiana 
Volunteers. 

3 Richard M. Robinson furnished the land near Bryantsville, Kentucky, on 
which the camp was established. 

4 Thomas J. Wood was appointed brigadier general of Volunteers October 11, 
1861. 



To Benjamin B. French 1 

September 30, 1861 

I do not recollect having any acquaintance with Esqr. Ferguson; 
but if the Comr. of Pub. Buildings inclines to appoint him to any 
place, I have no objection A. LIINTCOI^N- 

Sep. 30. 1861. 

1 AES, CSmH. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from Reverend E. 
P. Phelps, Baltimore Conference, Methodist Episcopal Church, September 28, 
1861, recommending B. W. Ferguson, "... a justice of the Peace in Washing- 
ton .... and a decided Union man . . . ." for an appointment **. . . under the 
commissioner of Public Buildings. . . ." Benjamin B. French of New Hampshire 
had recently been appointed commissioner, but no record has been found of B. 
W. Ferguson's appointment. 

[542] 



To George B. McCleUan 1 

Will Gen McCleUan please see Pay-Master Whitney a moment? 
Sep. 30. 1861 A 



* ALS-P, ISLA. Henry C. Whitney had been appointed paymaster August 6, 
1861. 



To Winfield Scott 1 

September 30, 1861 

The Sanitary Commission is doing a -work of great humanity, 
and of direct practical value to the nation, in this time of its trial. 
It is entitled to the gratitude and confidence of the people, and I 
trust it will be generously supported. There is no agency through 
which voluntary offerings of patriotism can be more effectively 
made. A. Lnsrcor-N. 

Winfield Scott. 

Washington, September 30, 1861. 

1 New York Tribune, October 7, 1861. Frederick L. Olmstead of the Sanitary 
Commission wrote Lincoln, September 30, 1861, "The Quarter Master General 
has informed the Sanitary Commission that some scarcity of blankets is for the 
present to be apprehended. The commission proposes to supply hospitals as far 
as possible from private stores, by which means a considerable quantity will be 
set free for the men in active service. "Without announcing the deficiency the 
Secretary of the Commission is about to issue a circular soliciting donations and 
respectfully requests a line from the President recommending the purpose of the 
Commission to the confidence of the public." (DLC-RTL). 



To Edward Bates 1 

[October, 1861] 

William McKay, wishes to be a Judge in Colorado. He was recom- 
mended for Judge of Kansas, & his papers are in the Atty Genls. 
Dept. 

1 AD, DNA RG 60, Papers of Attorney General, Appointments, Kansas, Box 
405. William McKay is not of record as appointed to office either in Kansas or 
Colorado. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Honorable Sec. of War: Executive Mansion, October ist, 1861. 

My dear Sir: The Postmaster-General and myself have special 
reasons for wishing to oblige Mr. Benj. F. Watson, of Lawrence, 

[543] 



OCTOBER 1, l86l 

Mass. He has been appointed an Assistant Paymaster or Pay- 
master of Volunteers, but he wishes the same post in the regular 
Army. If there is any vacancy, not committed to any other per- 
son, let Mr. Watson have it. If there be no such vacancy, oblige 
him, as far as you can, by sending him to service at the place 
which suits him best. Yours truly, A. 



1 Tracy, pp. 194-95. Benjamin F. Watson, appointed additional paymaster of 
Volunteers, September 5, 1861, had "been postmaster at Lawrence, Massachusetts, 
under Pierce and Buchanan, but had been removed because it was understood 
by the Post Office Department that he had accepted a commission in the Sixth 
Massachusetts Infantry, a three-months regiment Upon being mustered out 
August 2, Watson learned of his removal and telegraphed Lincoln. According to 
"Watson's account, Lincoln's reply of August 8 (presumably not extant), en- 
closing a memorandum from the postmaster general, explained as follows- "If I 
signed a paper, in making a change in the office, it was among others, without my 
being conscious of this particular one. ... I shall talk fully with the Postmaster- 
General on the subject when I next see him." (Benjamin F. Watson, "Abraham 
Lincoln as Seen by a Life-Long Democrat, After Going through Baltimore," 
Abraham Lincoln Tributes .... introduction by The Rev. "William Hayes 
Ward, D.D., New York, 1895, p. 139.) 



Memorandum for a Plan of Campaign 1 

[c. October i, 1861] 

On, or about the 5th. of October, (the exact day to be determined 
hereafter) I wish a movement made to seize and hold a point on 
the Railroad connecting Virginia and Tennesse, near the Mountain 
pass called Cumberland Gap. 

That point is now guarded against us by Zolicoffer, with 
6000 or 8000, rebels at Barboursville, Kentucky, say twentyfive 
miles from the Gap towards Lexington. 

We have a force of 5000 or 6000, under General Thomas, 2 at 
Camp Dick Robinson, about twentyfive miles from Lexington, and 
seventyfive from Zollicoffer's camp on the road between the two, 
which is not a Railroad, anywhere between Lexington and the 
point to be seized and along the whole length of which the 
Union sentiment among the people largely predominates. 

We have military possession of the Railroads from Cincinnati 
to Lexington, and from Louisville to Lexington, and some Home 
Guards under General Crittenden 3 are on the latter line. 

We have possession of the Railroad from Louisville to Nashville, 
Tenn, so far as Muldrough's Hill, about forty miles, and the rebels 
have possession of that road all South of there. At the Hill we 
have a force of 8000 under Gen. Sherman; 4 and about an equal 

[544] 



OCTOBER 1, l86l 

force of rebels is a very short distance South, under under [szc] Gen. 
Buckner. 

We have a large force at Paducah, and a smaller at Fort-Holt, 
both on the Kentucky side, with some at Bird's Point, Cairo, 
Mound City, Evansville, & New- Albany, all on the other side; 
and all which, with the Gun-Boats on the River, are, perhaps, 
sufficient to guard the Ohio from Louisville to it's mouth. 

About supplies of troops, my general idea is that all from "Wis- 
consin, Minesota, Iowa, Illinois, Missouri, and Kansas, not now 
elsewhere, be left to Fremont* 

All from Indiana and Michigan, not now elsewhere, be sent to 
Anderson at Louisville. 

All from Ohio, needed in Western Virginia be sent there; and 
any remainder, be sent to Mitchell 5 at Cincinnati, for Anderson. 

All East of the Mountains be appropriated to McClellan, and to 
the coast. 

As to movements, my idea is that the one for the coast, 6 and 
that on Cumberland Gap be simultaneous; and that, in the mean 
time, preparation, vigilant watching, and the defensive only be 
acted upon (this however, not to apply to Fremonts operations 
in Northern and middle Missouri) that before these movements, 
Thomas and Sherman shall respectively watch, but not attack 
Zollicoffer, and Buckner. 

That when the coast and Gap movements shall be ready, Sher- 
man is merely to stand fast; while all at Cincincinnati [szV], and all 
at Louisville with all on the lines, concentrate rapidly at Lexing- 
ton, and thence to Thomas' camp joining him, and the whole 
thence upon the Gap. 

It is for the Military men to decide whether they can find a pass 
through the mountains at or near the Gap, which can not be de- 
fended by the enemy, with a greatly inferior force, and what is to 
be done in regard to this. 

The Coast and Gap movements made. Generals McClellan and 
Fremont, in their respective Departments, will avail themselves of 
any advantages the diversions may present. 

1 AD, Tlie Rosenbach Company, Philadelphia and New York. The exact date of 
this document cannot be established from its contents, and it may have been com- 
posed a few days earlier. Orders for the movement on Cumberland Gap may be 
found in OR, I, IV, 294-306. 2 George H. Thomas 

8 Thomas L. Crittenden. 4 William T. Sherman. 

5 Ormsby M. Mitchel. 

6 The "coast movement'* referred to was certainly the November 7 expedi- 
tion which took Port Royal, South Carolina, with General Thomas W. Sherman 
commanding the Army forces. 

[545] 



To Padischah Abd ul Aziz Khan 1 

October 2, 1861 
Abraham Lincoln, 
President of the United States of America. 

To His Imperial Majesty Abd ul Aziz Khan, 

Padischah of the Empire of the Ottoman Family. 

Great and Good Friend: I have received the letter 
which Your Majesty has been pleased to address to me, com- 
municating intelligence of the demise of Your Majesty's honored 
brother, His late Imperial Majesty Abd ul Mejid Khan, and of 
your own accession to the throne of your ancestors. Assuring you 
of my deep sympathy at the death of your august brother, who 
was the constant friend of the United States, I beg leave to offer 
to Your Majesty my sincere and hearty congratulations upon your 
accession to his throne, with my best wishes that your reign may 
be happy and glorious to yourself and prosperous to your realm. 
Permit me also to assure Your Majesty of my constant and ear- 
nest desire to maintain the amity and good correspondence which 
have always subsisted and still prevail between the two nations, 
and that nothing shall be omitted on my part to cultivate and pro- 
mote the friendly sentiments always entertained and cherished by 
this Government in its relations with His late Majesty. And so I 
recommend Your Majesty to the protection of the Almighty. 

Written at Washington, the second day of October, Anno 
Domini 1861. Your Good Friend, ABRAHAM: LINCOLN. 

By the President: 

WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of State. 

1 Copy, DNA FS RG 59, Communications to Foreign Sovereigns and States, III, 
179-80. 



Inscription on Photograph Given 
to Mrs. Lucy G. Speed 1 

For Mrs. Lucy G. Speed, from whose pious hand I accepted the 
present of an Oxford Bible twenty years ago. A. LINCOLN 

Washington, B.C. October 3, 1861 

1 The photograph is now owned by Mrs. Elise C. Railey, Louisville, Kentucky. 
Mrs. Speed was the mother of Joshua F. Speed, whom Lincoln visited in August 
and September, 1841. 

[546] 



To Isabel II 1 

October 3, 1861 
Abraham. Lincoln, 

President of the United States of America. 
To Her Majesty Dona Isabel II, 

By the Grace of God and the Constitution 
of the Spanish Monarchy, Queen of Spain, 
&c., &c., &c. 

Great and Good Friend: I have received the letter 
which Your Majesty was pleased to address to me on the 12th. of 
August, last, conveying the melancholy tidings of the decease of 
Her Royal Highness the Infanta Dona Maria de Regla, Your 
Majesty's niece. 

I participate in the grief occasioned by this sad event and offer 
to Your Majesty and to your royal household my sincere condo- 
lence. 

May God have Your Majesty always in His safe and holy keep- 
ing! Your Good Friend, ABRAHAM Lmcor-isr. 

Washington, October 3, 1861. 

1 Copy, DNA FS RG 59, Communications to Foreign Sovereigns and States* III, 
180-81. 

To William H. Seward 1 

I think these papers better remain in the State Department. 
Oct. 3. 1861. AX. 

1 AES, DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 279. Lincoln's endorsement is 
written on an envelope containing papers of Theodore D. Edwards {vide supra, 
September 17, 1861). 

To WiUiam H. Seward 1 

October 3, 1861 

James Mitchell, the writer of one of the within letters, I know, 
and like. He was, for years, colonization agent, for Indiana; and I 
suppose, by what he says, being a democrat, he was removed by 
our friends. He is a Methodist of good standing, and Governor 
Wright especially wishes him to be cared for. His first care, as you 
see by his letter, is for his brother-in-law, G. F. Savitz. I will be 
really obliged, if the Secretary of State can find something for this 
brother-in-law. Will he please try? A. LusrcoLisr 

Oct. 3. 1861. 

1 AES, NAuE. Lincoln's endorsement has "been removed from the accom- 
panying letter. No record of an appointment for G. F. Savitz has "been found. 

[547] 



To Caleb B. Smith 1 

Executive Office October 3d. 1861 

Let the reservation be established as recommended by the Secre- 
tary of the Interior. A. LINCOLN. 

* Copy, DNA NR RG 75, Office of Indian Affairs, Executive Order File. The 
copy of Lincoln's order is written on the bottom of the page containing a copy 
of Smith's letter of October 3, 1861, recommending that the Uxntah Valley in 
Utah be set apart as an Indian reservation. 



To Edward Bates 1 

Hon. Attorney General Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir- Oct. 4. 1861 

Let Joseph E. Streeter, of Illinois, be appointed to the vacant 
Judgeship in Nebraska Territory. A. 



, DNA GE RG 60, Papers of Attorney General, Segregated Lincoln 
Material. Joseph E. Streeter o Joliet, Illinois, brother-in-law of Speaker of the 
House Galusha Grow, was appointed associate justice of Nebraska, and died in 
office in February, 1863. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

The writer of this is a very dear friend of mine, whom I would 
much wish to oblige. A. LINCOLN 

Oct. 4. 1861, 

1 AES, IHi. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from Nathan M. 
Knapp, Winchester, Illinois, September 18, 1861, requesting "some sort of ap- 
pointment of my son, Jno. Sullivan Knapp, who is a private in ... 14th 111. 
Vols. . . . Can he not be put to some service that will get him out of the 
ranks. . . ." John S. Knapp was appointed second lieutenant in the Seventeenth 
U.S. Infantry on October 24, 1861. 



General Order Concerning Flag Officers 1 

General Order. 
Executive of the United States. 

4th. October, 1861. 

Flag Officers of the United States Navy, authorized to wear a 
square flag at the mizzen-mast head, will take rank with Major 
Generals of the United States Army. ABRAHAM: 

1 DS, DNA WR NB RG 45, Executive Letters, No. 12. 

[548] 



To William H. Seward 1 

Hon. Secretary of State. Executive Mansion, October 4, 1861. 

My dear Sir: Please see Mr. Walker, well vouched as a Union 
man and son-in-law of Governor Morehead, and pleading for his 
release. I understand the Kentucky arrests were not made by spe- 
cial direction from here, and I am willing if you are that any of 
the parties may be released when James Guthrie and James Speed 
think they should be. Yours, truly, A. 



1 OR, II, II, 809. Ex-governor Charles S. Morehead was paroled January 6, 
1862, on request of Samuel J. Walker, on condition that he neither enter Ken- 
tucky or any other state in insurrection nor act or correspond against the author- 
ity of the U.S. (Ibid., p. 825). 

To Whom It May Concern 1 

Whom it may concern Washington, D.C. Oct. 4. 1861 

This will introduce Mr. A. C Badger formerly of Louisville, 
Kentucky. He is a reliable, and most worthy gentleman; and as 
such I commend him to all with "whom he may meet. 

A. 



1 ALS, CtY. Alpheus C. Badger was in the banking business at Chicago, Illi- 
nois. 

To Samuel R. Curtis 1 

Brig: Genl. S. R. Curtis Washington, D.C. 

My dear Sir: Oct. 7. 1861. 

Without prejudice, and looking to nothing but justice, and the 
public interest, I am greatly perplexed about Gen: Fremont: In 
your position, you can not but have a correct judgment in the case; 
and I beseech you to answer Gen. Cameron, when he hands you 
this, "Ought Gen: Fremont to be relieved from, or retained in his 
present command?" It shall be entirely confidential; but you can 
perceive how indispensable it is to justice & the public service, 
that I should have, an intelligent unprejudiced, and judicious opin- 
ion from some professional Military man on the spot, to assist me 
in the case. Yours very truly A. 



1 ALS, IHi. This letter was delivered to General Curtis by Simon Cameron on 
October 12. Cameron carried also a letter from Lincoln to Fremont which is pre- 
sumably not extant but is mentioned by Cameron in his letters to Lincoln of 
October 12 and 14 (DLC-BTL). Curtis replied under date of October 12, "The 
question you propose . . . seems easily answered. It is only a question of man- 
ner and time. . . ." (Ibid.}. Cameron's letter of October 14 related an interview 
in which Fremont ". . . . made an earnest appeal to me. ... In reply to this ap- 
peal, I told him that I would withhold the order [for his removal] until my return 

[549] 



OCTOBER /-> l86l 

to Washington. . . ." (Ibid.*). The copy of Winfield Scott's order removing Fre- 
mont which is in the Lincoln Papers bears the date October 7, but appears in the 
Official Records (I, III, 553) under date of October 24, 1861. While Cameron 
was in St. Louis, Montgomery Blair was in the North sounding out leading per- 
sons on Fremont's removal. His letters of October 5 and 7 related that William C. 
Bryant, Horace Greeley, Governor John A. Andrew and others, received the 
proposed removal very well (z&zd!.)- 

To William Dennison 1 

His Excellency: Washington, D.C. 

Gov. Dennison Oct. 7. 1861 

My dear Sir: Mr. Gurley tells me there are Six Regiments now 
in service from Ohio, who have not been commissioned either by 
you or me. I shall be glad if you will commission the officers, as I 
understand they are very uncomfortably situated, not knowing 
where they belong, or whether they belong anywhere; and as I do 
not wish to commission them over your head. Yours very truly 

A. LINCOLIST 

P.S. If you perceive no valid objection, let the commissions date, 
from the time they ought to have had them A.L. 

1 ALS, IHi. This letter was delivered by John A. Gurley on October 16, and 
Governor Dennison replied on the same date that the regiments ". . . organized 
under the authority of Genl Fremont, now in this State and in Missouri. . . ." 
would be promptly commissioned (DLC-RTL). 

To William Pickering 1 

Genl. Pickering: Executive Mansion Oct. 7. 1861 

You wish to be Governor of Washington. Last spring when I ap- 
pointed Dr. Jayne, 2 I was greatly pressed to appoint a man pre- 
sented by the Methodist people through Bishop Simpson & others, 
and I then said, if I should appoint another Governor of a Terri- 
tory from Illinois, it should be their man. I do not know that their 
man will accept that to "Washington; but it must be offered to him; 
and if he declines it, you may have, it. Your Obt. Servt. 

A. 



1 ALS, owned by Misses Catherine and Martha Pickering, and Mrs. Mary 
Streever, Jamaica, New York. William H. Wallace, Lincoln's first appointee as 
governor of Washington Territory, resigned upon becoming delegate to congress. 
Bishop Matthew Simpson's candidate was John Evans of Chicago, who declined 
the appointment on October 28, in view of ". . . the remoteness of that Terri- 
tory rendering a residence there incompatible with occasional attention to my 
interests in Illinois. . . ." (DLC-RTL.) William Pickering's appointment was 
confirmed by the Senate December 19, 1861. 

2 William Jayne, governor of Dakota Territory, nominated to the Senate March 
33, confirmed March 27, 1861. 

[550] 



To William EL Seward 1 

I shall be very glad to see the Secretaries at the time mentioned. 
Oct. 7. 1861. A. LINCOLN 

1 AES, NAuE. Lincoln's endorsement appears on a letter from Seward, Oc- 
tober 7, 1861: "General Cameron and I will come at 2 o'clock this afternoon 
to confer with you, if you are willing." 

To William H. Seward and Caleb B. Smith 1 

October 7, 1861 

The within papers show that the Agricultural societies of most 
of the North-Western States wish John W. Hoyt, of Wisconsin to 
have a particular place in connection with the World's fair. I wish 
the Sec. of State, and Sec. of Interior, to fully consider the claim 
they present, and to give due weight to it. A. LIJNTGOLIN* 

Oct. 7. 1861. 

1 AES, DNA FS RG 59, Appointments, Box 313. John W. Hoyt was not ap- 
pointed one of the U.S. commissioners to the London exhibition, but was ap- 
pointed a commissioner from the state of Wisconsin (Appletons' Cyclopaedia). 

To Simon Cameron 1 

October 10, 1861 

Sec. of War, please see Col, Barret, and see if you can not agree 
with him about taking his Cavalry Regt. to Kansas & the Indian 
frontier. A, LirccoLisr 

Oct. 10, 1861* 

1 ALS-P, ISLA. Lincoln's note was probably written for Colonel James A. Bar- 
ret of Springfield, Illinois, in command of the Tenth Illinois Cavalry, mustered 
in November 25, 1861. 

To George D. Ramsay and John A. Dahlgren 1 

Will Major Ramsey, or Capt. Dahlgren, please find work for 
Michael Donavan? A. LINCOLIN- 

Oct. 10, 1861 

1 AES, DLC-RTL. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from Mrs. Mary 
Buckley, October 1861, asking employment for her brother Michael Donovan, 
who had formerly been employed at the Washington Arsenal, of which Major 
George D. Ramsay was at this time in command. 

To Lorenzo Thomas 1 

[c. October io 9 1861] 

Col. C. F. Ruff for Brig. GenL in regular Army. Dr, McClintock 
is strongly in favor of him. 

[551] 



OCTOBER 11, l86l 

1 AE, RPB. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of a copy of Governor 
Andrew G. Curtin's letter, October 10, 1861, recommending Charles F. Ruff of 
Pennsylvania, for appointment as brigadier general. Dr. McClintock was prob- 
ably John McClintock, Methodist minister of Pennsylvania, at the time pastor 
of the American Chapel in Paris, France. There is no record of Ruff's appoint- 
ment. 

To Pacha Mohammed Said 1 

October 11, 1861 
Abraham Lincoln, 
President of the United States of America 

To His Highness Mohammed Said Pacha, 

Viceroy of Egypt and its Dependencies &c., &c. &c., 

Great and Good Friend: I have received from Mr. Thayer, Con- 
sul General of the United States at Alexandria, a full account of 
the liberal, enlightened and energetic proceedings "which, on his 
complaint, you have adopted in bringing to speedy and condign 
punishment the parties, subjects of Your Highness in Upper 
Egypt, who were concerned in an act of cruel persecution against 
Paris, an agent of certain Christian missionaries in Upper Egypt. 
I pray Your Highness to be assured that those proceedings, at once 
so prompt and so just, will be regarded as a new and unmistakable 
proof equally of Your Highness' friendship for the United States, 
and of the firmness, integrity and wisdom with which the Gov- 
ernment of Your Highness is conducted. Wishing you great pros- 
perity and success, I am, Your Friend, ABRAHAM: LINCOUNT 

Washington, October 11, 1861. 

By the President: 

WILLIAM: H. SEWARD, Secretary of State. 

1 Copy, DNA FS RG 59, Communications to Foreign Sovereigns and States, III, 
181. Faris-El-ECakim, a Syrian physician employed by American missionaries in 
selling and distributing Bibles, had been mobbed and imprisoned Upon charges 
brought by William S. Thayer, thirteen men had been assessed fines totaling 
$5,000 as damages for Faris, and to avoid delay the Viceroy had advanced the 
sum for prompt payment. 

To Whom It May Concern 1 

Whom it May Concern: Executive Mansion, Oct. 11, 1861. 

The bearer of this, Hugh Roden, says he is a drummer in the 
seventh regiment New Jersey volunteers, and wishes to be trans- 
ferred to the second regiment New Jersey volunteers, to be with 
his brother, who is in the latter regiment. If it will not injuriously 
affect the service, I shall be glad for him to be obliged. 

A. 

[552] 



OCTOBER 12, l86l 

i Troy, New York, Daily Times, August 13, 1881 (from the Newark Aduer- 
iser) . There is no record of the transfer requested by Hugh Roden. He was mus- 
,ered out of Company K, Seventh New Jersey Infantry, October 7, 1864, and his 
Brother George Roden was mustered out of the Second New Jersey Infantry, June 
ii, 1864. 

Memorandmn : 

Appointment of Charles Ernenwine 1 

Oct. 12. l86l 

Charles Ernenwine, of Philadelphia, is a Bavarian Officer, in 
this country from 1849 was Lieut. Col. to the Penn. aist. now 
3Ut of service. He wishes a respectable place in the service. 

1 AD, DLC-RTL,. There is no record of further federal service on the part of 
Ernenwine who served as lieutenant colonel in the Twenty-first Pennsylvania, a 
three-months regiment, April i^-August 8, 1861. 

Memorandmn: Appointment of John Spicer 1 

October 12, 1861 

Today, Oct. 12. 1861. B. C. Cook, of Ills, calls and says John 
Spicer, his brother-in-law, has done the duties from the beginning, 
of Q.M. & Com. in Gen. Popes Brigade and wishes to be regu- 
larly appointed to one or the other place. That J. W. Shaffer, 2 ap- 
pointed Q.M. & Speed Butler, appointed Com; each went to Pope 
fe finding Spicer there yielded to him, Shaffer getting into Hunter's 
staff, & Butler becoming Aid to Pope. Thus it stood till Spicer was 
hurt at fall of bridge & Mr. C does not know how it is since. 

1 AD, DLC-RTL. First Lieutenant John Spicer of the Twentieth Illinois In- 
fantry was dismissed August 20 and appointed commissary of subsistence of 
Volunteers September 10, 1861. He was dismissed from service August 16, 1862. 

2 John W. Shaffer, appointed captain and quartermaster of Volunteers August 
3, 1861, served throughout the war, being brevetted brigadier general of Volun- 
teers March 13, 1865, for service as chief of staff of the Army of the James in the 
campaign before Richmond in 1864. 

To William H. Seward 1 

October 12, 1861 

I did not know that Foster had a consulship; and if he had, I am 
astonished that he declines it. Let the Sec of State take the whole 
case & do as he pleases with it. A. LiisrcoLisr 

Oct. 12. 1861 

1 AES, BPB. Lincoln's endorsement is written on the back of a telegram from 
Thomas Foster of Minnesota, declining appointment as consul to Tahiti. Foster's 
appointment was announced in the New York Tribune^ October 7, 1861, but is 
not otherwise of record. The U.S. Official Register lists Alexander Salmon, con- 
sul at Tahiti as of September 30, 1861. 

[553] 



To Winfield Scott 1 

Lieut. Gen. Winfield Scott: Washington, October 14, 1861. 

The military line of the United States for the suppression of the 
insurrection may be extended so far as Bangor in Maine. You and 
any officer acting under your authority are hereby authorized to 
suspend the writ of habeas corpus in any place between that place 
and the city of Washington. ABRAHAM LmcoLisr. 

By the President: 

WILLIAM: H. SEWARD, Secretary of State. 



OR, II, II, 109. 



To Caleb B. Smith 1 



Washington, October 14, 1861. 

Dear Sir: How is this? I supposed I was appointing for Register 
of Wills a citizen of this District. Now the commission comes to me 
"Moses Kelly, of New Hampshire" I do not like this. Yours truly, 

A. LINCOLN. 

1 NH, VII, 8 Smith replied October 15, 1861, "Moses Kelly came to this Dis- 
trict in 1841 from New Hampshire and has resided here continuously ever since. 
He . . . married here & has raised a family here. He has been a constant voter 
here for twenty years and is an owner of real estate here. . . ." (DLC-RTL). 
Kelly had been chief clerk in the Department of Interior, to which office Smith 
appointed his son Walton J. Smith (New York Tribune, October 17, 1861). See 
also Lincoln to Caleb B. Smith October 16, infra. 

To Edward Bates 1 

Hon. Atty. General Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir Oct. 15. 1861 

I have just looked over your opinion in Capt. Stansbury's case, 
& for which I thank you. 

Please return to me the Capt's letter, with Gen. Scott's endorse- 
ment on it. Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, DNA GE RG 60, Papers of Attorney General, Segregated Lincoln Ma- 
terial. Captain Howard Stansbury of the Topographical Engineers was retired 
from duty September 28, 1861. 

To Edward Bates 1 

Will the Attorney General please have this case attended to as 
soon as reasonably convenient? A. 

Oct 15. 1861 

[554] 



OCTOBER 16, l86l 

1 AES, DNA RG 204, U.S. Pardon Attorney, A 354. Lincoln's endorsement 
is written on a letter from Charles P. Sengstack, former warden of the District 
Penitentiary, October 10, 1861, recommending a pardon for Isaac Lambert. Bates 
replied October 19, "The case of Isaac Lambert . . . has been examined by me 
several times. My feelings were enlisted on the side of mercy. ... I cannot yet 
affirmatively recommend his pardon. ... I shall be really glad to learn that 
you . . . find in the case, a proper occasion for the exercise of your merciful 
power. . . ." (DLC-RTL). See further, Lincoln to Bates, June 11, 1862. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

October [c. 15] 1861 

I would like for Hon. D. S. Dickinson to be obliged in this case 
Oct. 1861. A. LINCOLN 

1 AES, DLC-Cameron Papers. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from 
Daniel S. Dickinson, Binghamton, New York, October 15, 1861, recommending 
". . . my friend and neighbour Harris G. Ro[d]gers. . . ." for appointment as 
paymaster. Rodgers was appointed additional paymaster of Volunteers October 22, 
1862. 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Very respectfully submitted to the Secretary of War, as being an 
ample recommendation. A. LINCOLN 

Oct 15. 1861 

1 AES, Herbert Wells Fay Collection. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a 
letter signed by John A. Logan and others, August i, 1861, recommending L. B. 
Colby of New York for an army appointment. No appointment is of record. 

To Montgomery C. Meigs 1 

Q.M. Genl. Meigs Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir Oct. 15. 1861 

This introduces Mr. Thomas H. Clay, son of the late Hon. 
Henry Clay. He calls on business; and I shall be pleased for you 
to oblige him as far as possible, consistently with the public in- 
terest. Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

* ALS, IHi. Thomas H. Clay's business errand has not been determined. Lin- 
coln appointed him minister to Nicaragua, October 21, 1862. 

To Edward Bates 1 

Hon. Attorney General Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir: Oct. 16. 1861 

Please send a commission for Bland Ballard, as District Judge 
for the District of Kentucky. Yours truly A. LINCOLN 

[555] 



OCTOBER l6, l86l 

1 ALS, DNA GE RG 60, Papers of Attorney General, Segregated Lincoln Ma- 
terial. Bland Ballard was appointed to replace Thomas B. Munroe who **. . . has 
joined the rebels." (New York Times, October 19, 1861). 

Memorandum : 
Appointment of Frank E. Foster 1 

Oct. 16. 1861 
To-day, Gov. Chase brings to my notice the name of "Frank E. 

Foster" of Follett Foster & Co, Columbus O. I wish to get some- 

thing for him. 

i AD, DLC-RTL. No appointment for Foster has been found. 

To Caleb B. Smith 1 

What do you think of this? A.L. 

Oct. 16, 1861. 

1 AES-P, ISLA. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from Amos Reed, 
clerk of the House committee investigating charges of disloyalty, October 16, 1861, 
stating that testimony had been taken before the committee "seriously impeach- 
ing the loyalty of Mr. [Moses] Kelley," late chief clerk of the Department of 
Interior. Smith replied October 19, 1861, "On the gth inst. I received a letter 
from Hon John F. Potter Chairman of the Com. furnishing me a list of all the 
persons employed in this Department against whom evidence of disloyalty had 
been adduced before the Com. Mr. Kelly's name does not appear in the 
list. . . ." (DLC-RTL). The Potter Investigating Committee adjourned October 
9, reporting evidence of treason on the part of 472 federal employees (New 
York Tribune, October 10, 1861). Moses Kelly's appointment as register of wills 
was allowed to stand (see Lincoln to Smith, October 14, supra) . 

To George D. Ramsay 1 

Majr. Ramsay Executive Mansion 

My dear Sir Oct. 17, 1861 

The lady bearer of this says she has two sons who want to 
work. Set them at it, if possible. Wanting to work is so rare a 
merit, that it should be encouraged Yours truly 

A. 



1 ALS, ORB. The bearer cannot be identified, but see Lincoln to Ramsay, Oc- 
tober 10, supra. Mrs. Mary Buckley, a widow with six children, may have ap- 
pealed to Lincoln a second time for aid, 

To Simon Cameron 1 

This matter should be attended to at once A.L. 

Oct. 18. 1861. 

[556] 



OCTOBER ig, l86l 

1 AES, DNA WR RG 107, Secretary of War, Letters Received, M 539. Lincoln's 
endorsement is written on an official copy of a letter from Governor John A. An- 
drew to General Benjamin F. Butler, October 5, 1861, protesting Butler's personal 
recruitment efforts in Massachusetts and making particular reference to reports 
that Butler was offering bounties for enlistments in his expedition (see Lincoln 
to New England Governors, September 11, supra). Governor Andrew went to 
Washington to protest in person the unfair competition of two recruiting authori- 
ties operating within the state of Massachusetts. The record of the controversy, 
which continued into 1862, may be found in the Official Records (III, I, 810-66). 

Memorandum: 
Appointment of Hiram Shaw and William V. Wolfe 1 

For the sake of Kentucky and the memory of Henry Clay I would 
like these appointments to be made as soon as practicable. 
Oct. 18. 1861. A.L. 

1 AES, DLC-K.TL. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from Thomas 
H. Clay, October 17, 1861, requesting appointment of Hiram Shaw of Lexing- 
ton, and William V. Wolfe of Louisville, Kentucky, as paymasters. There is no 
record of either man's appointment as paymaster, but William V. Wolfe served 
as first lieutenant in the Fifteenth Kentucky Infantry. 



To Thomas W. Sherman 1 

General Thomas W. Sherman, Washington, 

Annapolis, Md.: October 18, 1861. 

Your dispatch of yesterday received and shown to General Mc- 
Clellan. I have promised him to not break his army here without 
his consent. 

I do not think I shall go to Annapolis. A. LINCOLN. 

1 OR, I, VI, 181. George B. McClellan to Thomas A. Scott, October 17, 1861, 
"... I will not consent to one other man being detached from this army for 
that [Port Royal] expedition. ... No outside expedition can effect the re- 
sult. . . ." (ibid., p. 179). Sherman to Lincoln, October 17, 1861, "Necessity com- 
pels me to address the President direct & ask that the jgth N York Highland- 
ers ... be ordered here [Annapolis]. . . . We commence embarking to- 
morrow morning. . . ." (DLC-RTL). 



To Salmon E Chase 1 

Sir: Washington October 19. 1861 

I request that you will give to the Collector of Customs at New- 
York the necessary instructions to secure the free admission of the 
goods, specified in the accompanying Invoice and Bill of Lading, 
imported per Steamer "Glasgow" for the use of the Presidential 
mansion [A. LINCOLN] 

Hon: S. P. Chase, Secretary of the Treasury 

[557] 



OCTOBER 9, l86l 

i LS, DNA FI RG 56, General Records, Treasury Department, Series AB, 1861, 
Letters from Executive Officers, II, 6. The signature has been clipped from the 
letter. An endorsement on the back of the letter specifies, "Attended to Oct 19/61." 

Memorandum: Appointment of F. M. Murray 1 

Whenever a Paymaster-Quarter-Master, or Commissary, can be 
appointed for Paducah, Ky Mr. Murray ought to be the man. 
Oct. 19, 1861. A. 



1 AES, DLC-RTL. Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from L. T. 
Trimble, Paducah, Kentucky, October 6, 1861, introducing F. M. Murray. Mur- 
ray had written Lincoln from Paris, Kentucky, September 5, 1861, "For the sin 
of having given my best support to your claims ... I have been . . . an exile 
from my home and family. My residence is in ... Paducah . . . where ... I 
was engaged in the practice of law. . . ." (DLC-RTL). There is no record of an 
appointment for Murray. 

To Frank Fuller 1 

Frank Fuller. Washington D.C 

Gov. Utah Oct 20 1861 

Sir. 

The completion of the Telegraph to Great Salt Lake City is au- 
spicious of the Stability & Union of the Republic. 
The Government reciprocates your Congratulations 

ABRAHAM: 



1 Copy, owned by Miss Eileen Thorne, Jackson Heights, New York. The op- 
erator's copy of the telegram is written on a blank of the Pacific Telegraph Com- 
pany. Lincoln replied to a telegram of the same date from Fuller, secretary of 
state and acting governor of Utah, celebrating the opening of telegraph wires 
to Salt Lake City. The text of Fuller's telegram appears in the New York Herald, 
October ai, 861, as follows: 

"To the President of the United States: Great Salt Lake City. 

"Utah, whose citizens strenuously resist all imputations of disloyalty, congrat- 
ulates the President upon the completion of an enterprise which spans the con- 
tinent, unites two oceans and connects remote extremities of the body politic with 
the great government heart. May the whole system speedily thrill with quick- 
ened pulsations of that heart, the parricidal hand of political treason be punished, 
and the entire sisterhood of States join hands in glad reunion around the national 
fireside. "FRANK: FULLER, 

"Acting Governor of Utah." 

To Simon Cameron 1 

Respectfully submitted to Sec. of War about a Regt. & not an 
officer A.L. 

Oct. 21, 1861 

[558] 



O C TOBE R 21, l86l 

1 AES, ORB Lincoln's endorsement is written on a letter from Joshua F. Speed, 
October 18, 1861, requesting that a regiment of cavalry Tinder "Col. Bowles" 
(probably William M. Bolles, colonel of the Second West Virginia Cavalry), 
stationed at Parkersburg, West Virginia, be sent to Kentucky and assigned to 
Jeremiah T. Boyle's brigade. 



To Simon Cameron 1 

Sec. of War, please see Mr. T. H. Clay, son of the late Hon. Henry 
Clay. A. 

Oct. 21, 1861 

1 ALS-P, ISLA. See Lincoln's memorandum, October 18, supra. 



To Joseph Hooker 1 

[October 21, 1861] 

If agreeable to Genl. Hooter, let the time be 4 o'clock, P.M. Tues- 
day, October 22, 1861. A. LINCOLN 

1 AES, owned by Alfred W. Stern, Chicago, Illinois. Lincoln's endorsement is 
written on a letter from Brigadier General Hooker, October 21, 1861, inviting 
the president to appoint the day and be present at the first raising of the flag on 
newly completed Fort Lincoln. 



To John J. Hughes 1 

Archbishop Hughes Washington, DC. Oct. 21. 1861. 

Rt. Rev. Sir: I am sure you will pardon me if, in my ignorance, I 
do not address [you] with technical correctness. I find no law au- 
thorizing the appointment of Chaplains for our hospitals; and yet 
the services of chaplains are more needed, perhaps, in the hos- 
pitals, than with the healthy soldiers in the field. With this view, 
I have given a sort of quasi appointment, (a copy of which I in- 
close) to each of three protestant ministers, who have accepted, 
and entered upon the duties. 

If you perceive no objection, I will thank you to give me the 
name or names of one or more suitable persons of the Catholic 
Church, to whom I may with propriety, tender the same service. 

Many thanks for your kind, and judicious letters to Gov. Seward, 
and which he regularly allows me both the pleasure and the profit 
of perusing. 

With the highest respect Your Obt. Servt. A. LINCOLN 

* ADf S, DLC-RTL, In the Lincoln Papers there are several letters from Arch- 
bishop Hughes hut none of them is concerned with the appointment of hospital 

[559] 



OCTOBER 21, l86l 

chaplains. See Lincoln's form letter appointing hospital chaplains submitted with 
the Annual Message to Congress, December 3, infra. Archbishop Francis P. Ken- 
rick of Baltimore assigned Reverend Francis X. Boyle and Reverend F. M. Ma- 
grath to the performance of the duties of chaplain, October 24, 1861 



To Officer in Command at 
Poolesville, Maryland 1 

Executive Mansion, October 21, 1861 10 p.m. 
Officer in Command at Poolesville: 

Send a mounted messenger to the battle-ground and bring me 
information from General Stone. I want the particulars as to re- 
sult of engagement and the relative position of the forces for the 
night, their numbers, and such other information as will give me 
a correct understanding of affairs. A. LINCOUNT. 

1 OK, I, LI, I, 498. Captain Francis G. Young of the Seventy-first Pennsylvania 
Volunteers telegraphed Lincoln of the death of his old friend, General Edward 
D. Baker, at 5 P.JVT., October 21 (DLC-RTL). General Charles E Stone replied to 
Lincoln's telegram at 10:35 P.M., that it -was "impossible to give full particulars 
of what is yet inexplicable to me. . . . We have still possession of Harrisons 
Island and some fifteen hundred men on the Va side opposite Edwards Ferry 
. . . Our killed & -wounded may reach 200. Number of prisoners unknown." 
(Ibid.). A second telegram from Captain Young, October 21, gave particulars of 
the battle of Ball's Bluff (ibid.). 



To Montgomery C. Meigs 1 

Submitted to Q.M. General. Washburne, who sends this, is an 
M.C, and one of an investigating Committee now at St. Louis. 
Oct. 22. 1861. A 



1 AES, IHi. Lincoln's endorsement appears on a telegram from Elihu B. 
Washburne, St. Louis via Springfield, October 21, 1861: 

"Yours reed. [Major Robert] Allen prostrated by some kind of sickness. 
Committee still think the public interest imperatively demands some able and 
incorruptible regular Army quarter master to be sent here immdy. This is 
sent like former despatch from Springfield as we dont dare trust St Louis tele- 
graph." 

Concerning conditions at St. Louis, see Lincoln's communications to Curtis 
and Hunter, October 24, 1861, infra. Lincoln's communication to which Wash- 
burne replied has not been found. Meigs endorsed below Lincoln's endorse- 
ment on October 23 "I have consulted Secy of War Order Maj [Robert E.] 
Clary to proceed with all despatch to St Louis relieve Maj Allen until Maj 
Allen recovers from his present illness sufficiently to return to duty. When 
Maj Allen recovers Maj Clary will proceed to the writer or report by letter 
to Gen Rosecrans & take charge of the QM Depot in that Dept. locating him- 
self where he can best supervise & control it." 

[560] 



To Caleb B. Smith 1 

Executive Mansion, 
Hon. Sec. of Interior Washington, Oct. 23, 1861 

My dear Sir: If you can think to mention the next time I see 
you, I will tell you more fully what Mr. Lewis says of the cases 
noted by him on the inclosed cards. Very truly yours, 

A. LiisrcoLisr 
1 Tracy, pp. 195-96. "Mr. Lewis" has not been identified. 



To Caleb B. Smith 1 

Sir Washington Oct [23?] 1861 

The proposed contract for Coal and privileges at the Isthmus of 
Chiriqui, with suggestions & my conditional approval thereon 
has been returned from the Navy Department because of the press- 
ing business therein which does not allow the Secretary time to 
examine the subject 

It is therefore referred to you with authority to act, and you are 
hereby authorized to carry the contract into effect, should the re- 
sult of your examination be satisfactory and establish that it will 
prove of sufficient value to the government. The War, Navy, Post 
Office & Interior Departments may all derive benefits from this 
proposed contract. The latter under the law of ad March 1819 re- 
quires heavy appropriations for the transport & support of cap- 
tured Africans. It is possible that a modification of that law may 
make it a measure of great economy to direct there negroes to some 
of the unocupied lands of Central America, and the present 
contract, may if well considered and arranged, be the introduction 
to this, and an equally desirable measure to secure the removal of 
negroes from this country. I therefore recommend that all these 
points be considered and that the contract be so drawn as to secure 
such advantages as may in your judgement seem desirable for the 
United States to hold. 
To Hon Caleb Smith 

Secretary of the Interior 

* Copy or draft, DLC-RTL. The bracketed date is that assigned to the document 
in the Lincoln Papers. Not in Lincoln's handwriting, the copy or draft may be 
what Lincoln sent or intended to send to Smith, but Lincoln's endorsement to 
Smith, October 24, infra, seems to indicate conclusively that the project was 
turned over to the Interior Department at this time. The Chiriqui Improvement 
Company headed by Ambrose W. Thompson of Philadelphia had in 1855 ob- 
tained control of several hundred thousand acres in Panama. On August 8 Thomp- 
son proposed to the Navy Department to deliver coal at the Chiriqui Lagoon for 

[561] 



OCTOBER 24, l86l 

one-half the price the government then paid (Thompson to Welles, August 8, 
1861, DLC-RTL). Ninian W. Edwards, whom Lincoln had asked to examine the 
project, gave his approval (Edwards to Lincoln, August 9, 1861, ibid.). For fur- 
ther developments, see Lincoln to Smith, October 24, infra. 

To Samuel R. Curtis 1 

Executive Mansion, 
Brig: Genl. S. R. Curtis Washington, Oct. 24, 1861. 

Dear Sir On receipt of this, with the accompanying inclosures, 
you will take safe, certain, and suitable measures to have the in- 
closure addressed to Major General Fremont, delivered to him, 
with all reasonable despatch subject to these conditions only, 
that if, when Gen. Fremont shall be reached by the messenger 
(yourself, or any one sent by you) he shall then have, in personal 
command, fought and won a battle, or shall then be actually in a 
battle, or shall then be in the immediate presence of the enemy, 
in expectation of a battle, it is not to be delivered, but held for 
further orders. After, and not till after, the delivery to Gen. Fre- 
mont, let the inclosure addressed to Gen. Hunter be delivered to 
him. Your Obt. Servt. A. LINCOLN 

1 ALS, IHi. The enclosures referred to were undoubtedly General Orders No. 
18 and Lincoln's letter to General David Hunter, infra. It seems obvious, how- 
ever, that after writing this letter to Curtis, Lincoln decided to withhold the let- 
ter to Hunter until a later date, thus allowing time for General Hunter to as- 
sume command before receiving Lincoln's suggestions (see Lincoln to Curtis, 
October 28, infra). General Orders No. *8 (OR, I, III, 553) is as follows: 

"Headquarters of the Army, 
"Washington, October 24, 1861. 

"Major-General Fremont, of the U.S. Army, the present commander of the 
Western Department of the same, will, on the receipt of this order, call Major- 
General Hunter, of the U S. Volunteers, to relieve him temporarily in that com- 
mand, when he (Major-General Fremont) will report to General Headquarters, 
by letter, for further orders. "WIJSTFIELD SCOTT. 

"By command: E. D. TOWN SEND, 
"Assistant Adjutant-General." 

Lincoln's precaution in withholding the letter to Hunter was justified, for 
General Fremont attempted to prevent the delivery of General Orders No. 18. 
Leonard Swett, by whom Lincoln dispatched the letter to Curtis, related the cir- 
cumstances at length in a letter dated November 9, 1861, which reads in part 
as follows: 

"Tuesday morning [October 29], I went immediately to Genl. Curtis . . . but I 
could not see him until evening .... we found numerous obstacles to the de- 
livery of the order. It had unfortunately been announced in the New York papers, 
that the order was coming. Several St Louis men, who knew me came out on 
the same train. ... It was therefore thought by Genl* Curtis <fe myself that my 
connection with it might be suspected and some other person should take it 
through the lines. . . . Gen'l Curtis knew nothing of the character of these 
orders except what I, a stranger to him, told him. In the event of trouble, which 

[562] 



OCTOBER 24, l86l 

he feared, it might be necessary for him ... to knou? what it contained. ... I 
opened one of the orders, took several copies, after which, the Genl enclosed it 
in a new envellop and directed it as before. 

"The trouble of delivery was to get some reliable man, who had legitimate busi- 
ness inside Gen'l Fremont's lines. Capt [Ezekiel] Boyden, of Champaign Co. 
Ills . . . was selected as one, and Capt McKinney [Thomas J. McKenny?] . . . 
as the other. . . . McKinney took the originals and delivered them first. 

"He arrived at Fremonts camp, at five oclock am. [November i] having rode 
on horseback the two nights and day previous, having gone by Holla. After wait- 
ing about five hours, and learning that there was no immediate prospect of 
battle, he applied at head quarters for admission The aid . . . told him he must 
make known his errand He declined, stating he must see the Gen'l & could 
confer with no one else I omitted to say he was dressed for the trip like a 
country farmer. . . . Finally he was admitted. When the Gen'l read the order 
he said excitedly "Sir, how did you get through my lines," when informed the 
Gen'l dismissed him. In a few moments . . . the aid came to him and told him 
not tell [_sic] in camp the character of the order In a few moments more he 
came back again asking if Hunter knew of this To this . . . he responded as 
directed that a messenger had gone by Sedalia to give him a duplicate The 
messenger then tried to find where Hunter was. The soldiers did not know and 
the Genl's friends could not or would not tell. He tried to get a pass out of 
camp That was refused About eleven oclock at night, he overheard the pass- 
word With that and an old pass of Gen'l Curtis he started & got out The next 
day [November 2] about twelve oclock he found Hunter. . . . 

"The following facts I learn from Capt J W Shaffer of Freeport As soon as 
the order arrived, Fremont ordered all his men to arms He sent back for Hunt- 
er' [s] division to march all night which they did, to join in the battle in the 
morning. When morning came, Fremont issued his Farewell address and left 
without giving any information about the Gov property There went with him, 
his body guard, 50 Indians and a paymaster with between 200000 & 300,000$ 
The paymaster was arrested here last night and has some of the money. Hunter 
on taking command send [.sic] cavalry scouts in all directions for from 30 to 40 
miles but of course there was no enemy. . . . 

"Let me tell a few more things which I have tried to investigate candidly & be- 
lieve to be true. Gen'l Fremont has talked about his signature to unlawful orders 
being above law & to be obeyed The german people have talked about making 
him Dictator Some of his officers in quite high standing have talked so too." 

Fremont's order relinquishing his command to General Hunter was issued 
under date of November 2 (General Orders No. 28, OR, I, III, 559)- 



[563] 



THE COLLECTED WORKS OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN 
WAS COMPOSED IN INTERTYPE WAVERLEY 

PRINTED AND BOUND IN NEW YORK CITY 

BY H. WOLFF BOOK MANUFACTURING COMPANY 

DOCUMENTS HAVE BEEN REPRODUCED IN COLLOTYPE 

BY MERIDEN GRAVURE COMPANY, MERIDEN, CONNECTICUT 

FRONTISPIECES WERE REPRODUCED IN GRAVURE 

BY R. R. DONNELLEY AND SONS COMPANY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 
DESIGNED BY P. J. CONKWRIGHT 



